Information Systems Frontiers (2020) 22:1433-1445
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-019-09944-8

®

Check for
updates

Institutional Perspectives on the Process of Enterprise
Architecture Adoption

 

Duong Dang '@® - Samuli Pekkola

Published online: 9 July 2019
© The Author(s) 2019

Abstract

Organizations often adopt enterprise architecture (EA) when planning how best to develop their information technology (IT) or
businesses, for strategic management, or generally for managing change initiatives. This variety of different uses affects many
stakeholders within and between organizations. Because stakeholders have dissimilar backgrounds, positions, assumptions, and
activities, they respond differently to changes and the potential problems that emerge from those changes. This situation creates
contradictions and conflicts between stakeholders that may further influence project activities and ultimately determine how EA
is adopted. In this paper, we examine how institutional pressures influence EA adoption. Based on a qualitative case study of two
cases, we show how regulative, normative, and cognitive pressures influence stakeholders’ activities and behaviors during the
process of EA adoption. Our contribution thus lies in identifying roles of institutional pressures in different phases during the
process of EA adoption and how it changes overtime. The results provide insights into EA adoption and the process of

institutionalization, which help to explain emergent challenges in EA adoption.

Keywords Enterprise architecture - EA adoption - Institutional theory - Institutionalization process

1 Introduction

Enterprise architecture (EA) attempts to improve alignment
between business and information technology (IT) manage-
ment and support IT planning and decision-making
(Magoulas et al. 2012; Ross 2009; Simon et al. 2014;). EA
is of interest to both private- and public-sector organizations.
For example, the United States and Finland, where a large
number of such projects have been implemented, have
enacted laws that oblige state agencies to use EA, such as
the Clinger-Cohen Act 1996 and the E-Government Act
2002. Because multiple actors participate in or are affected
by such projects (Jonkers et al. 2006; Shah and Kourdi

><} Duong Dang
duong.dang @uwasa.fi

Samuli Pekkola
samuli.pekkola@tuni.fi

School of Technology and Innovations, University of Vaasa,
Vaasa, Finland

Faculty of Management and Business, Tampere University,
Tampere, Finland

2007), understanding all stakeholders’ perspectives is crucial
for successful adoption (Dang and Pekkola 2016).

EA adoption refers to how organizations actually use EA,
or how EA works there (Dang and Pekkola, 2017). EA is
adopted through EA projects or EA programs consisting of
several projects. EA adoption process is a process where EA
becomes a mundane practice of an organization (Iyamu 2009;
Weiss et al. 2013). Although the process includes many
phases, there are different views (c.f., Armour and Kaisler
2001; Armour et al. 1999; Banaeianjahromi and Smolander
2017). For example, Banaeianjahromi and Smolander (2017)
identified three phases: pre-development, development, and
post-development, while Armour and colleagues (Armour
and Kaisler 2001; Armour et al. 1999) divided it in five
phases: initiating the process, characterizing the baseline ar-
chitecture, developing the target architecture, planning the ar-
chitecture transition, and planning the architecture implemen-
tation. We view EA adoption including two main phases: EA
initiation, where EA functionalities are created, and EA im-
plementation, where those functionalities are deployed. EA
functionality refers to the architectural descriptions of the or-
ganization’s current and future state, general principles for
their architecture, and a roadmap to the future state (Niemi
and Pekkola 2017).

g) Springer
1434

EA adoption studies have often ignored the challenges of
institutionalizing EA (Dang and Pekkola 2016; Hylving and
Bygstad 2019). Instead, they have studied on frameworks
(c.f., Simon et al. 2013; Dang and Pekkola 2017), the benefits
and success factors of EA adoption (c.f., Schmidt and
Buxman 2011; Lange et al. 2015), agile EA adoption (c.f,,
Bondar et al. 2017; Alzoubi et al. 2018), and problems with
EA (c.f., Kappelman and Zachman 2013; Ajer and Olsen
2018). However, they provide little or no insight into institu-
tional and stakeholder factors in EA adoption from the view-
points of senior managers and chief information officers
[CIOs], project managers and enterprise architects, and IT
specialists and non-IT civil servants, for instance.

While literature has indicated the importance of cognitive,
normative, and regulative pressure on adoption intention
(Khalifa and Davison 2006; Krell et al. 2009; Liang et al.
2007; Teo and Pian 2003; Yoon and George 2013; Zheng
et al. 2013), little is known about how these pressures affect
the adoption process. EA literature on the institutional view 1s
especially scarce; the few examples focusing on the institu-
tionalization barriers within EA management (Dang 2017;
Iyamu 2009), which factors influence architectural coordina-
tion (Weiss et al. 2013), interoperability challenges (Hjort-
Madsen and Gotze 2004), government pressures (Hjort-
Madsen 2007), potential solutions for EA adoption (Dang
and Pekkola 2016; Dang et al. 2019), and the stakeholders
logics in EA adoption (Dang 2019). The ways in which insti-
tutional factors influence different phases of EA adoption re-
main unknown, as are stakeholders’ responses to challenges
that emerge within EA adoption process. We argue that ana-
lyzing these issues will provide an in-depth understanding of
the values, norms, and rules found in different phases of EA
adoption and will further explain the challenges in EA
initiatives.

Our research question is as follows: How do institutional
pressures influence different phases of EA adoption? Based on
a qualitative case study of two organizations and their key EA
stakeholders, our findings contribute to literature by identify-
ing roles of institutional pressures in different phases during
the process of EA adoption and how they change overtime.
The findings show that cognitive pressures dominate the early
stage of EA adoption, while regulative pressures become more
important later. We also show how values, norms, and rules
appear in different EA-adoption phases. These factors have
several practical implications, as highlighting institutional fac-
tors will enable practitioners to design strategies and respond
to the challenges of EA adoption.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
The next section introduces the background to the study
before moving on to describe the research methods and
context. After summarizing and discussing the study’s
findings, the paper ends with conclusions, implications,
and limitations.

g) Springer

Inf Syst Front (2020) 22:1433-1445
2 Background
2.1 Enterprise Architecture

EA has no universally accepted definition with a wide ranges
of scopes, covering from organizational business to technolo-
gy (Dang and Pekkola 2017). In this paper, we view EA as “an
approach for managing the complexity of an organization’s
structures, business environments, and different information
systems, and for facilitating the integration of strategy, person-
nel, business, data, and IT’ (Dang and Pekkola 2017, p.131).
Enterprise architecture management (EAM) to mean “the
management activities conducted in an organization to install,
maintain and purposefully develop an organization’s EA”
(Lange et al. 2015, p. 1). In that sense, EA project and its
activities can be understood to be a part of EAM. EA products
are outputs of an EA project, such as strategic plans, stan-
dards, and frameworks (Dang 2019). EA approach is under-
stood as methodologies to establish an EA. For example, or-
ganizations can use the Open Group Architecture Framework
(TOGAF) as an approach to establish their EA from initiation
to use (Hylving and Bygstad 2019).

2.2 The Institutional View within EA Research

Information systems (IS) researchers use institutional theory
as a lens to study how institutions, organizations, and organi-
zational entities influence one another (Jepperson 1991;
Mignerat and Rivard 2009) and how different institutional
stages emerge (Mignerat and Rivard 2009). Most studies have
focused on organization-level issues, while the few that have
considered individuals and groups (Mignerat and Rivard
2009; Weiss et al. 2013).

The use of institutional theory as an analytical lens appears
to be rare in EA research (Dang and Pekkola 2016). Those
include, for example, Iyamu (2009) identified the internal bar-
riers to the process of EA adoption as being organizational
structures, administrative processes, organizational politics,
and technical capabilities. Dang and Pekkola (2016) looked
at institutionalization in different phases of EA projects, while
Hjort-Madsen and Getze (2004) studied interoperability chal-
lenges at different levels of government. Magnusson and
Nilsson (2006) argue that institutional theory can be used to
introduce legitimacy and a historical perspective to architec-
tural frameworks. Hjort-Madsen (2007) discussed govern-
ment pressures for consolidation and value preservation and
the political motives that drive EAM development. Dang
(2019) studied institutional logics influencing EA adoption,
and Hjort-Madsen et al. (2007) investigated the influence of
EAM adoption in government organizations. These studies
have not considered how institutional pressures change over
time, nor how individuals or groups are influenced by
Inf Syst Front (2020) 22:1433-1445

institutional pressures during the process of EA adoption. We
try to fill this gap.

Because each stakeholder group exhibits distinct behaviors
and activities, they will respond differently to a given action.
For that reason, we focus on different stakeholders, including
the management team (e.g., senior managers), the project team
(e.g., project managers (PMs)), and users. Within this view,
organizations, groups, and individuals constitute an internal
group, while society and central governments are externals.
We argue that both groups are equally important in shaping
the stakeholders’ activities and behaviors and lead to different
responses to new issues. Analyzing the institutional factors
can thus help in understanding the roles of values, norms,
and rules in the EA-adoption process, from establishing the
technology or practice (i.e., EA) to its institutionalization.

2.3 Theoretical Lens

We adopt Mahalingam and Levitt’s formulation of an institu-
tion for our study: “(neo) institutions are a set of rules, norms,
and values operating in a given environment that help generate
a regularity of behavior among actors affected by that envi-
ronment” (2007, p. 523). This formulation acknowledges that
organizations may initiate EA with certain expectations but
may leave others to do the interpreting and applying. Rules,
norms, and values may drive (and therefore explain) the ac-
tivities and behaviors of stakeholders during the institutional-
ization of EA (Mahalingam and Levitt 2007).

As institutional theory examines “the processes and mech-
anisms by which structures, schemas, rules, and routines be-
come established as authoritative guidelines for social behav-
ior.” (Scott 2005, p. 408) The theory is often used to study
social perspectives in organizations that implement IS projects
(Mignerat and Rivard 2009; Orlikowski and Barley 2001).
Institutional theory thus offers a lens for analyzing the rules,
norms, and values that underlie and legitimize the behaviors
and activities of groups and individuals (Berente and Yoo
2012). The majority of studies that have used institutional
theory as a lens have focused on the macro level, where the
organization is considered to be the smallest type of actor
(Berente and Yoo 2012; DiMaggio and Powell 1983).
Others, however, have argued that the micro levels of various
phenomena (e.g., groups or individuals) are rooted at higher
levels (Berente and Yoo 2012; DiMaggio and Powell 1983;
Powell and DiMaggio 1991). This notion allows us to focus
on individuals and groups and governmental policies.

Three main pressures influence organizational and individ-
ual behavior: cognitive (values), normative (norms), and regu-
lative (rules) pressures (Scott 2005). Cognitive pressures relate
to institutional culture, such as beliefs or organizational values
(DiMaggio and Powell 1983). Normative pressures refer to
how an organization’s approach to professionalization—for
example, work norms or mimetic behaviors—informs its

1435

members’ activities (DiMaggio and Powell 1983). Regulative
pressures, both formal and informal, include policies and ele-
ments in the legal environment that explain how institutions
constrain and regulate stakeholder activities and behavior
(Mignerat and Rivard 2009), as in the case of local govern-
ments ruled by a central government.

When pressures arise, organizations and stakeholders tend
to conform in order to achieve legitimacy and to secure re-
sources that are important for their survival (Ribeiro and
Scapens 2006; Scott 2005). Yet their responses vary (Oliver
1991) due to different backgrounds, cultures, beliefs, socie-
ties, and political environments. Responses are applied differ-
ently in EA project activities (for example, in terms of scope,
approach, and outcomes), which then steers the projects in
different directions. For instance, top managers, project mem-
bers, and users may initiate different actions by their varying
views on a given problem, which creates contradictions and
conflicts among stakeholders. Institutional theory thus entails
both the assumptions that are taken for granted and the actions
that influence and guide decision-makers.

We adopt this perspective as a means of understanding
stakeholders’ behaviors and activities (Cloutier and Langley
2013; Scott 2005; Oliver 1991; Friedland and Alford 1991)
during the adoption process. The use of the institutional view
helps in understanding how institutional pressures change
over time and how individuals or groups are influenced by
institutional pressures during the adoption process.

3 Research Methods and Context
3.1 Research Methods

Our empirical research was conducted from 2015 to 2016. We
used an interpretive case study as a research approach (Myers
1997; Walsham 1995). As Myers (1997) and Walsham (1995)
have instructed, we first conducted a literature review
(Webster and Watson 2002) in order to form the theoretical
foundations for the study. The theories were used loosely so
that they would not influence the data collection and analysis.
The lenses of the theoretical foundations of institutional theo-
ry and EA were adopted later and used in the data analysis.

The use of interpretive case studies helps to understand
various phenomena within a case’s context (Benbasat,
Goldstein, and Mead 1987). As Orlikowski and Baroudi
(1991, p. 13) note, this approach allows researchers to “under-
stand how members of a social group, through their participa-
tion in social processes, enact their particular realities and
endow them with meaning, and to show how these meanings,
beliefs and intentions of the members help to constitute their
social action.”

We chose two Vietnamese provinces for our multiple-case
study (Stake 2005). They were chosen for two key reasons.

g) Springer
1436

First, multiple cases may be “...similar or dissimilar, redun-
dancy and variety each important. They are chosen because it
is believed that understanding them will lead to better under-
standing, perhaps better theorizing, about a still larger collec-
tion of cases” (Stake 2005, p. 446). Second, the cases were
different in terms of capabilities, complexity, and experiences
with e-government initiatives. For example, the “Omega” case
(a pseudonym) used its own resources and procedures, while
the “Eta” case was the first province to adopt EA, so it relied
on a sponsor, local authorities, and external resources and
procedures. In these respects, we considered Omega to be a
purpose sample and Eta to be an opportunistic and reputation-
al sample (Miles and Huberman 1994).

3.2 The Cases and their Contexts

Our study focuses on two Vietnamese provinces adopting EA
through EA projects. Vietnam has 63 provinces and equiva-
lent municipalities (thereafter provinces). Each province has
several departments (e.g., Department of Justice, Department
of Information and Communications—DIC) and districts.
Each department or district has several divisions (e.g.,
Division of Information Technology and Division of
Planning and Finance of DIC) (Fig. 1).

Vietnam has shown a strong political commitment to pro-
moting electronic government. For instance, during the period
2011-2015, the Vietnamese government’s master plan en-
couraged state agencies to “use ICT for their administrative
reform and business services to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of the public administration system” (Decision
No.1605/QD-TTg by the Primier Minister 2010, p. 1). In
our cases, EA was thought of as a means of achieving these
aims. At the time of this study, however, there were no oblig-
atory laws or policies that the provinces could follow, which
resulted in public organizations adopting EA according to
their own perceptions. This approach caused variances be-
tween the cases.

EA projects in both cases were considered as mega pro-
jects. The projects bridged three levels of administrative

Eta/Omega Province n
Administration Administration

Department or
District n

 

 

Department or Department or
District 1 District 2

Division 2.2 Division 2.m

Fig. 1 Organizational structure of the cases

 

 

g) Springer

Inf Syst Front (2020) 22:1433-1445

structure (Fig. 1). This means that each EA functionality
may influence several agencies in all organizational levels.
EA projects were established on the administration level.
DICs’ were in charge of the project management.
Stakeholders participating the projects were collected from
Cases’ administration (e.g., senior managers, CIOs),
Department or District (CIOs, PMs, IT specialists), and
Division (e.g., IT specialists, civil servants). Each stakeholder
may represent more than one agency or group. Project activ-
ities was thus influenced by internal factors (e.g., individual
and agencies within the organizations) and external factors
(e.g., sponsor and government policies). We investigate how
those factors influence to the adoption process.

3.2.1 Omega EA Project

Omega is a province with little experience on e-government.
The EA project was established in 2012, with the main objec-
tive of reforming and connecting distinct public services and
increasing interoperability between and within organizations.
The scope of the EA project covered three levels of the ad-
ministrative hierarchy (see Fig. 1). Three groups of stake-
holders were involved with or influenced by the project activ-
ities: senior management, the project team, and users. The EA
products included a strategic plan to digitalize services in the
Omega agencies and a new model for centralized public ser-
vices as a single point of delivery for citizens and enterprises
and organization employees. Table | shows the main activities
and timeline for the Omega EA project.

3.2.2 Eta EA Project

Eta is a local e-government leader in Vietnam. Supported by a
sponsor’s loan, Eta had embarked on an EA project to reform
administrative procedures and public services, reduce the
number of information systems, and improve interoperability
within and between organizations. Commencing in January
2010, the EA project affected all organizational levels (Fig.
1). The EA products included standards and frameworks for
use in various organizations’ IT application strategies. In the
absence of explicit guidance for using those frameworks, it
became apparent that the program’s outcomes were somewhat
limited—for instance, the use of EA products was not report-
ed. Table 2 shows the Eta project’s main activities and
timeline.

3.3 Data Collection and Analysis

To gain an in-depth understanding of the topic, we used a
qualitative research approach (Myers 1997; Walsham 1995).
We conducted face-to-face semi-structured interviews with
individuals who worked directly on the EA projects. We re-
cruited new interviewees until we were no longer gaining new
Inf Syst Front (2020) 22:1433-1445

Table 1 Timeline: Omega EA

project Timeline Phase
Sept. 2012 to Initiation
June 2013
June 2013 to Implementation

Oct. 2015

insights or information. To enhance our contextual knowledge
and understanding of the interviewees’ statements, we supple-
mented the interviews with a range of project documents,
reports, news, and presentations.

Our data collection followed a semi-structured interview
approach. Interview questions aimed at understanding EA
adoption. They were organized into four themes. The explor-
atory theme aimed to understand the interviewees’ back-
grounds and roles, how they comprehended EA, and who
had prompted the use of EA. The practice theme aimed to
understand EA-adoption processes such as the projects’ activ-
ities, events, methods, features, resources, usage, and evalua-
tion. The problems theme aimed to understand the challenges
that arise during EA adoption and how they were managed.
The final theme aimed to elaborate on emerging issues.

A total of 16 interviews were conducted in 2015 from June
to August and four more in 2016 from July to August (inter-
viewees of each case are equal). During both rounds of inter-
views, the interviewees worked at various levels and positions
in the EA projects as senior managers, CIOs, project man-
agers, enterprise architects, IT specialists, and civil servants.
In short, we interviewed the stakeholders involved in the
adoption process. We assumed that these informants could
provide reliable input for the research. We began by
interviewing the CIOs to identify key stakeholders, the main
project activities, and any relevant secondary sources, which
enabled us to draw a project timeline and to specify stake-
holders and their roles. The interviews also helped us to divide
the project lifecycle into two main phases: initiation and im-
plementation. We then interviewed the other stakeholders.
Four additional interviews that were held in 2016 focused on
previous findings; they were organized with CIOs and project
managers to ensure that our interpretations were correct. All
interviews were conducted in Vietnamese, recorded and tran-
scribed; they lasted between 45 and 60 min.

Table 2 Timeline: Eta EA project

Timeline Phase

Jan. 2010 to Initiation
June 2013

June 2013 to Implementation
Dec. 2013

1437

Main activities

A proposal to establish EA functionalities, including a master plan for
digitalized services and a new model for public services (e.g.,
architectures and standardized services and administrative procedures)

Implement EA functionalities in the organization’s agencies (e.g., central
administrations, departments, districts, and divisions)

The transcripts were imported to ATLAS.ti for detailed
analysis. Our coding unit was the text segment (no larger than
a paragraph and no smaller than a sentence); single text seg-
ments could be assigned multiple codes. Relationships, cate-
gories, and subcategories were grouped and coded using axial
coding (Strauss and Corbin 1998). Throughout the analysis,
open and axial coding and interview transcripts were constant-
ly compared. Following the axial coding, we interpreted the
data in terms of institutional pressures, with particular regard
to stakeholders’ behaviors and activities. During the coding
process, we used a triangulation technique by cross-checking
between data sources (Stake 2005).

We then extracted and analyzed the data through the theo-
retical lens to understand (for example) the activities and
behaviors related to regulative pressures, although further
identification and coding allowed us to classify and refine
these codes. The analysis was conducted on the Vietnamese
transcripts; only relevant selections were translated into
English for illustrative purposes. Table 3 shows an example
of the coding. We finished the data analysis with the guidance
of Eisenhardt (1989) and compared our findings with those
from the literature.

4 Findings

During EA adoption, institutional pressures shape the institu-
tionalization process. The pressures influence the stake-
holders’ activities and behaviors. Although the stakeholder
responses may seem to be similar, the reactions differ among
specific pressures and issues because the stakeholders tend to
have dissimilar backgrounds, cultures, and perceptions toward
the phenomena. In this context, the use of institutional pres-
sures as a lens helps to understand EA adoption through the
stakeholders’ activities and behaviors.

Main activities

Proposal to establish EA functionalities, including common IT architectures,

standards, frameworks, and master plans for all organizational levels

Implement EA functionalities in all agencies, including central

administration, departments, districts, and divisions

g) Springer
1438

Table 3. Examples of coding: values, norms, and rules

Inf Syst Front (2020) 22:1433-1445

Phase

“Some leaders are afraid that when EA is deployed, our roles and benefits will be reduced. Implementation
That’s why, in some cases, we needed a year or longer to persuade the leader and staff to

change their attitudes.” (Enterprise architect, Omega)

“The management team perceived EA similarly to other IT projects. The EA project was
managed by the ICT department, and those in charge had a strong technical
background, which seemed to affect [the project’s] direction.” (CIO, Eta)

“They [consultants] brought EA approaches with them from a developed country to us for Implementation

“We deployed EA as a means for administrative reform with the help of [the CIO]
committee, and [EA] replaced IT application planning in the state agencies.” (CIO,

“At that time, the definitions, scope, scale, level of detail, method, and output of an EA

Initiation

Institutional Concept Selected quotation
pressure
Cognitive —_ Belief or values in an
pressure institutional environment
Normative Professionalization, work
pressure norms, or habits implementation.” (Senior manager, Eta)
Omega)
Regulative Formal and informal
pressure policies or work rules

project [from the authorities] were vague. In our EA plan, we weren’t able to focus

appropriately on cooperation between the agencies.” (Enterprise architect, Eta)
“EA was initiated by the decision of the [management] board, so others had to deploy it
within their organizations.” (PM, Omega)

4.1 Cognitive Pressures on EA Adoption

While the central government had a master plan and decree for
IT applications for state agencies, no regulations or laws were
in place to force provinces to adopt EA. EA was generally
considered to be a new approach for strategies, business-IT
alignment, and planning in organizations. In addition, because
agreements on EA products related to standards, frameworks,
and products were lacking, the cases adopted EA purely on the
basis of their own premises, initial perceptions, and expecta-
tions about how EA could help to reform administrative pro-
cedures, align business and IT applications, and increase IS
interoperability. This indicates the absence of external pres-
sures (i.e., rules), professional practices (i.e., norms) and ex-
ternal institutions in the EA adoption or decision-making. In
contrast, cognitive-cultural factors from internal institutions
(i.e., values) were significant in both cases. This is because
in the initiation phase, the EA adoption is dependent on the
stakeholders’ backgrounds, skills, and capabilities. For exam-
ple, when the stakeholders undertook EA projects, they had
difficulties in understanding why EA had been chosen in the
first place, instead of other governance models or approaches.

Cognitive-cultural factors emerged in the initiation phase,
and influenced the EA adoption. For example, EA was not the
Eta IT department’s first choice but had been picked by Eta’s
senior managers on the basis of its potential financial support
from a sponsor and for helping them to reform business ser-
vices and models. Eta’s senior managers perceived EA to be
similar to a “city plan” that would help management to mini-
mize costs and save time. The senior managers appeared to
have no idea about the organizational capabilities and re-
sources required for EA adoption. Further, other stakeholders
involved in the EA-adoption process lacked the requisite skills
to identify successful and appropriate EA examples elsewhere,

g) Springer

or which model, direction, or method they should use. Some
even lacked knowledge about EA. As one enterprise architect
stated,

“At that time, we [EA project team] lacked all kinds of
clarity [related to EA] about the definition, scope, scale,
level of detail, method, and output of an EA project.”

This indicates that cognitive-cultural factors were important
in the early stages of EA adoption. To overcome the cognitive-
cultural related challenges, the organizations used different ap-
proaches to improve or train their stakeholders to be able to
adapt better to the situation. For instance, Eta used consultants
to assist with the EA proposal; it also sent its employees to
courses to gain knowledge about EA, although the
challenges—trelated to dissimilar views, general EA aware-
ness, and expected benefits—appeared to remain. These chal-
lenges made it difficult to agree on even the simplest details,
which led to severe delays. Omega did not use consultants but
used its own IT staff. Because the staff had experience with IT
projects but not EA, they focused on IT issues and not on
business perspectives. According to a senior manager,

“When we specified the EA requirements [EA function-
alities] ... no one in our team had EA experience.... We
didn’t understand what EA was—whether it was a
human-resource or a financial issue, what the policies
were, and so on. We spent a lot of time discussing the
topic but found it difficult to reach an agreement.”

This situation had several consequences. For example, it
later became clear that the proposed schedules and objectives
Inf Syst Front (2020) 22:1433-1445

were unrealistic and infeasible when the responsibility for
proposing EA functionalities fell to the IT department or other
agencies without appropriate credibility, as was the case in
Eta. In contrast, EA initiation was more feasible and effective
when the organization had a multidisciplinary team from dif-
ferent departments, led by a senior manager, as was the case in
Omega. It thus seems that in order to improve the efficiency
and quality of EA adoption, the adoption should be specified
early by senior managers or agencies with strong credibility in
terms of budgets, business services, and policies that support
cooperation among all affected agencies. As one CIO said,

“One of the main problems [with the EA project] in our
organization is the IT department. They’re responsible
for [proposing EA functionalities], but they focus too
much on IT issues rather than business aspects. This
leads to infeasibility in the next phase in terms of such
issues as relevance to inter- or intra-agency cooperation,
business-services reform, and budget.”

Cognitive-cultural factors also appeared in other forms in
the initiation phase of EA adoption; for example, collabora-
tion difficulties were evident both within and between the
agencies. In particular, the leaders in the agencies were often
unwilling to participate in joint EA projects; instead they pre-
ferred to secure their own businesses, services, and resources.
They also seemed to fear losing the “lucrative benefits” asso-
ciated with their positions in the organization or in society.
This outlook threatened to confine the scope of the EA project
to single agencies, with minimum intervention from others.
Alternatively, the organizations might focus solely on IT per-
spectives during their adoption of EA, as one PM noted:

“We don’t have a law or policy on EA in the state
agencies; it’s just one option among many. That
means we have problems when working with other
agencies, so we just focus on IT rather than on busi-
ness perspectives.”

The variance in stakeholders’ backgrounds, skills, and ca-
pabilities influenced EA adoption during the early stage, and
this variance caused difficulties in promoting EA during the
initiation phase, since collaboration practices and the scope,
scale, and level of detail of EA functionalities first had to be
negotiated and defined. As an IT specialist from Omega said,

“Our agencies ... conduct [EA] planning with ... differ-
ent understandings of the benefits, and they [stake-
holders] come from different backgrounds. This makes
it difficult to create [common] plans, as we must con-
stantly negotiate with others.”

1439
4.2 Normative Pressures on EA Adoption

Normative pressures are usually influenced by other institu-
tions. This situation became apparent when an organization’s
EA approaches were unclear. Our findings suggest that nor-
mative factors were not a significant factor during the initia-
tion phase. As a PM from Eta articulated,

“Certain approaches were used in the early stage of EA
adoption in different organizations. For example, some
used [international] consultants to establish their re-
quirements [for EA functionalities], and some used their
own IT department. However, the results were different,
even though they used a similar approach. This is be-
cause EA can be understood as everything from strategy
to planning, depending on the adopters ...”

The norms varied between different organizations. For ex-
ample, some organizations used EA as an independent com-
ponent for certain dedicated agencies only, and not for the
whole organization. In contrast, sometimes EA was seen to
supplement IT programs within organizations. In both situa-
tions, the norms did not influence these approaches.

Although organizations can place normative pressures on
one another, our findings indicate that such an influence is
unclear. This situation can be explained by the fact that EA
approaches vary because of a lack of general definitions,
agreements, frameworks, and standards. This variance caused
the organizations to copy each other when choosing the EA or
its approaches. Such mimicking is not adequate, however,
because of the complexity of EA. As Omega’s CIO stated,

“We were proposing EA independently from other EA
projects [from China, Singapore, and a local organiza-
tion], because we recognized that there’s no single ap-
proach that fits with every organization adopting EA.”

It was also evident that the organizations treated EA as a
normal IT project, with a focus on purchasing software and
hardware. The organizations neglected the business perspec-
tives of their EA projects. The EA projects also appeared to
last longer than the manager’s single term, which put EA
project activities at risk, as the new manager may not have
cared about the old manager’s projects, including EA. This
scenario resulted in organizations dividing their EA projects
into several subprojects. As an IT specialist from Omega
stated,

“Our EA project is divided into several subprojects,
managed by different agencies within the organization.
At the same time, they [the leaders in the agencies] were

g) Springer
1440

responsible for a number of other [non-EA] projects,
with similar sets of objectives.... This breaks down the
unity of EA project.”

4.3 Regulative Pressures on EA Adoption

While regulative pressures were less dominant in the initiation
phase of EA adoption, the case organizations had to conform
to policies and protocols governing their projects once the
adoption process moved on to the implementation phase.
For example, implementation activities had to follow project
management policies and protocols, and interoperability is-
sues needed agreements from involved agencies. In addition,
politicians, sponsors, and other powers put pressure on stake-
holders, which led to conflicts between the stakeholders, who
consequently reacted differently to the EA project activities.
For example, in Eta some of the services connecting the agen-
cies and their IS were not implemented because the stake-
holders had followed organizational policies on intra-
organizational services.

The organizations usually either followed their own ap-
proaches to implementing EA or were heavily influenced by
their sponsor; for example, Eta adopted the FEA framework at
its sponsors’ suggestion. This points out the main differences
between the cases: regulative factors appeared Eta clearer than
those that in Omega, while cognitive-cultural factors in Eta
seemed more complex than those in Omega. In the words of
an Eta enterprise architect,

“We had advice and pressure to follow a certain ap-
proach [suggested by the sponsor] in a very different
environment [in comparison to Eta’s environment in
terms of political climate, organizational structures, ca-
pabilities, and skills]. This created a very complex situ-
ation for deploying EA [into Eta].”

Many agencies were involved in the EA implementation.
Each agency had its own objectives and powers, so severe
difficulties in implementing EA emerged, for example in
terms of sharing information with other agencies or having
conflicting interests and information asymmetries among the
parties. This situation caused the EA adoption to fall behind
schedule, hindering cooperation between the parties and re-
ducing the use of EA in practice. In the words of an enterprise
architect from Omega,

“Some leaders [at Omega’s agencies] were afraid that
once EA was implemented into their agencies, their roles
and other advantages would be reduced.... This concern
was solved when senior managers became involved in

g) Springer

Inf Syst Front (2020) 22:1433-1445

implementation. Then the leaders had to obey [the se-
nior managers’ | orders.”

Regulative pressures were also enforced by stakeholders
from external institutions, who were typically thought of as
experts in EA adoption. However, their involvement did not
always have a positive impact on EA adoption. For example,
due to a sponsor’s request, experts from developed countries
were imported to participate in EA implementation in Eta. The
experts used their earlier experiences and approaches to
implementing EA within Eta. These outside ideas and prac-
tices were ineffective since Eta’s socio-technical and socio-
political environments were not considered. Ultimately, EA
project in Eta turned out to be not particularly successful. In
the words of Eta’s PM,

“We received funding for our EA project [from the
sponsor]. We had to deploy EA and establish several
groups to comply with their funding policies. If we
didn’t follow them, we might have lost their support....
However, most of the ideas and proposals from them
[the experts] were simply inapplicable to Eta, as they
required business-process reforms and changes to all
levels of the administrative hierarchy. This was
impossible.”

Regulative pressures dominated the implementation phase.
However, some events indicate that norms and rules also ap-
peared. For example, due to inefficient tools and methods the
quality control of EA products was poor. Consequently EA
project teams applied the techniques they were familiar with,
and that had been approved and used by their organization.
Yet those methods were inappropriate for EA. This made it
impossible to estimate EA project activities and their perfor-
mance and risks.

4.4 Institutional Pressures Roles in each Phase of EA
Adoption

The absence of appropriate EA policies and successful EA
precedents was evident. EA-adoption activities were thus
depended on individual people and their characteristics, 1.e.
their cognitive-cultural factors. In particular, the characteris-
tics of senior managers and project team members played
important roles in the initiation phase in terms of steering the
adoption process, defining EA products, and increasing the
stakeholders’ awareness. Cognitive-cultural factors thus influ-
ence the implementation phase, and further the whole project.

Normative factors emerged when other institutions tried to
influence stakeholders in their selection of EA functionalities.
For example, Eta was influenced by the sponsor through con-
sultants. As a result, Eta mimicked the EA approaches used in
Inf Syst Front (2020) 22:1433-1445

the developed countries while Omega utilized its own ap-
proaches. Professional groups influenced the technological
choices in Omega.

In relation to regulative pressures, the cases were not sub-
ject to any formal rules for EA projects. For that reason, senior
managers tailored policies and formalized rules for establish-
ing EA. This resulted in organizational members to consider
the rules to be less important during the initiation phase. They
however became crucial during the implementation phase
when the projects were split into explicit tasks and activities.
For example, legal rules for governing public IT investments
strongly influenced the implementation phase. Table 4 sum-
marizes institutional factors influencing EA adoption.

5 Discussion

5.1 Cognitive Pressures Determine Project Direction
in the Initiation Phase

Our case organizations adopted EA on their own premises and
according to their perceptions and expectations about how EA
could help them reform administrative procedures, align busi-
ness and IT applications, and increase IS interoperability. The
cases shared a number of features when they chose EA. The
EA projects, architectures, approaches, tasks, and products
were initiated and influenced by senior managers, and two
main groups participated in the very early stage: the manage-
ment team and the project team. We argue that cognitive fac-
tors are more emergent and important than normative and
regulative pressures in the early stage of adoption.
Particularly important are cognitive-cultural issues related to
the managers’ understanding and perception of the role of EA
in organizations (as in Omega) and the stakeholders’ knowl-
edge of EA functionalities (as in Eta).

Table 4 Cognitive, normative,
and regulative factors in EA
adoption

Initiation phase

Values

— Values related to the adoption context (e.g.,

1441

Regulatory factors, such as legal frameworks and gover-
nance practices, can be thought of as a prerequisite for EA
projects (Saha 2008). But these items are more prevalent in
developed countries with stable governance, sufficient re-
sources, and high levels of IT awareness (Dang 2017;
Janssen and Hjort-Madsen 2007). In our cases, frequent
changes occurred in governmental structures and governance
practices; in addition, legal frameworks were unstable, and
necessary resources were lacking. Under the circumstances,
senior managers and others in charge of EA adoption steered
the EA implementations. For example, while Omega pro-
duced both physical and document-based strategic-planning
products, Eta’s product was solely document based.

Both organizations had little knowledge of the benefits of
EA before their decision to adopt EA. They only expected EA
to help in reforming administrative procedures and services, to
reduce the number of information systems in use, and to im-
prove interoperability. This finding parallels the literature on
unclear and intangible EA benefits (Lange et al. 2015; Niemi
and Pekkola 2016; Shanks et al. 2018) and emphasizes the
importance of cognitive factors in the early stage of EA
adoption.

Furthermore, although formal policies had little impact dur-
ing the initiation phase, informal regulative factors within pow-
erful agencies affected EA projects. For example, financial
departments or agencies led by senior managers seemed to be
more successful in taking responsibility for EA projects than
less powerful agencies. In Eta’s situation, the agencies in which
EA projects had been assigned to IT departments suffered from
a lack of credibility. In the case of Omega, it became clear that
the higher the agency’s status in the organizational pecking
order, the more successful its EA project would likely be.
This situation parallels the assignment of responsibility for
EA projects to the US Office of Management and Budget
(Bellman and Rausch 2004) and to the committee under the
president of South Korea (Lee and Kwon 2013). The finding is

Implementation phase

— Values related to the change behavior (e.g.,

technology, strategy, planning) and readiness
and awareness of stakeholders

— Values related to the perception of EA products,
and how to assess them

Norms — Norms related to how the organizations should
approach and establish EA projects
— Norms related to approaches used in other

organizations

Rules — Rules when deciding to adopt EA initiatives

— Rules in agencies that are assigned
responsibilities for project activities
— Rules on inter- and intra-agency cooperation

users’ responses to EA project activities and
products)

— Values related to the implementation of the EA
approach (e.g., how stakeholders switch from
traditional approaches to new ones)

Norms related to work practices (e.g., project
management practices)

— Rules on project protocols (e.g., procedures,
reporting, management)

— Rules on how EA projects are organized and
approved

g) Springer
1442

also aligned with Lohe and Legner’s (2014) work on the im-
portance of having explicit goals for EA initiatives. No re-
searchers to date have mentioned when such roles, responsi-
bilities, and goals should be determined. This study thus sup-
plements the literature by indicating the roles of both the stake-
holders’ backgrounds and informal EA policies during the ear-
ly stage of adoption.

5.2 Regulative Pressures Dominate EA
Implementation

Regulative pressures were found to have emerged during
the implementation phase. Similarly to any project within
an organization, EA projects also had to follow procedural
and financial policies. In both cases, these external pres-
sures affected the entire process of implementation. For
example, in addition to governmental policies, Eta was
required to follow its sponsor’s protocols and instructions
in all activities related to EA implementation. Regulative
factors thus played an important role for EA adoption in
the implementation phase. Although earlier studies have
identified the importance of regulative factors (Chatterjee
et al. 2002; Liang et al. 2007; Teo and Pian 2003), we have
explicitly shown the phase of the adoption process in
which regulative factors are influential.

Regulative pressures created several conflicts between ex-
ternal and internal institutions within the two cases—for in-
stance among project members and senior managers. Because
the collaborations that were formed within EA projects varied,
these conflicts escalated to other institutions (1.e., to other
agencies within the organizations). These conflicts extended
the schedules in Eta, while in Omega, the conflicts confined
the project scope exclusively to IT perspectives. This situation
highlights the role of internal formal and informal policies and
of the senior managers who handle the conflicts. In Omega,
the top managers led the EA projects, which made it easier to
resolve inter- and intra-agency issues. In contrast, Eta projects
that were led by less important departments (such as the IT
department) faced risks in cooperating with other agencies.
This scenario arose because different stakeholders had differ-
ent viewpoints (Isomaki and Liimatainen 2008; Janssen and
Hjort-Madsen 2007). We argue that EA should be planned ina
way that acknowledges existing organizational structures and
policies.

The impact of norms and values was less visible during the
implementation phase. This is understandable, as EA imple-
mentation is a matter of following administrative acts and
orders, technical-compliance guidelines, and different poli-
cies, all of which regulate the activities. The situation differs
significantly from the initiation phase, where the stakeholders
struggled with different views of EA usage and appropriate-
ness as well as lacking instructions and policies.

g) Springer

Inf Syst Front (2020) 22:1433-1445
5.3 How Institutional Pressures Roles Change

Although the literature has pointed out the role of institutional
pressures (Bharati et al. 2014; Khalifa and Davison 2006; Krell
et al. 2009; Liang et al. 2007; Teo and Pian 2003; Yoon and
George 2013; Zheng et al. 2013), the ways in which they
influence different phases during the adoption process remain
unclear (Mignerat and Rivard 2009; Weiss et al. 2013; Dang
2017). This section illustrates how the institutional factors steer
the adoption process and ultimately shape the adoption.

Cognitive factors relate to one’s own values and volition.
They seem to play significant roles in the initiation phase of
EA adoption. This means that the stakeholders’ backgrounds
and experiences influenced activities towards EA adoption,
such as adoption direction, frameworks, and products.
Improving these issues requires a willingness to change behav-
iors and to reconsider personal values, neither of which are
easy to do (DiMaggio and Powell 1983; Suchman 1995). In
contrast, regulative factors are typically imposed by govern-
ments or organizations. They seems to be very important in the
implementation phase of EA adoption. Two kinds of regulative
factor, related to formal and informal rules, emerged. Formal
rules refer to regulatory behaviors within a given society, while
informal rules originate from senior managers and power insti-
tutions. The informal rules can be replaced by new ones from
other settings (Scott 2005). In our cases, all agencies imple-
mented EA according to their own informal rules, including
rules for governing project responsibility, cooperation, and
project organizations. This indicates the importance of effects
of local rules and practices—that is, the organizational culture
in a broader sense (Niemi and Pekkola 2016). Relying solely
on formal rules is inadequate for EA implementation. This
shows that the relative importance of values, norms, and rules
changes when the adoption process evolves within different
institutions. When the institutions are more involved in the
EA implementation, regulative factors become more dominant
and cognitive-cultural factors become more complex.

Normative factors, which are typically influenced and
enforced by peer groups, were less evident in both initiation
and implementation phases. Normative factors are usually poor-
ly articulated and therefore difficult to identify (Hu and Huang
2006; Chandwani and De 2016). Figure 2 illustrates the relative
importance of cognitive, normative, and regulative factors in the
process of EA adoption. Values are central at the early stage,
while rules become dominant during the implementation phase
when the stakeholders must follow organizational rules.

6 Conclusions, Implications, and Limitations

In this paper, we have explored how institutional factors in-
fluence the process of EA adoption in different phases and
how those factors change over time. We have discussed these
Inf Syst Front (2020) 22:1433-1445

Fig. 2 The relative importance of
institutional factors in EA
adoption

 

 

 

1443
Importance
Values
Rules and Values and
norms norms
—— ; Phase
Initiation Implementation

findings earlier; next we will present the contributions, impli-
cations, and limitations of our study.

First, the literature has indicated the role of cognitive, nor-
mative, and regulative pressures when new information sys-
tems are adopted (Bharati et al. 2014; Khalifa and Davison
2006; Krell et al. 2009; Liang et al. 2007; Teo and Pian 2003;
Yoon and George 2013; Zheng et al. 2013). But the ways in
which these pressures influence the adoption process in its
different phases remain unknown, from establishing the tech-
nology or practice (i.e., EA in this case) to EA institutionali-
zation. Cognitive pressures appear to dominate during the
early phases, while regulative pressures seem to become im-
portant during the implementation phase of EA adoption.

Second, although institutional theory is used in the EA Iiter-
ature, the theory is used to study on the barriers of institution-
alization (Iyamu 2009), interoperability challenges (Hjort-
Madsen and Goetze 2004), governmental pressures (Hjort-
Madsen, 2007), or institutional logics within EA adoption
(Dang 2019). These studies have not revealed how
individuals and groups are involved in or are influenced by
the pressure. From this perspective, our study offers a rare
analysis of individuals and groups in institutions, as suggested
by Mignerat and Rivard (2009) and Weiss et al. (2013). Our
findings indicate how values, norms, and rules appear and
changes in different phases in the process of EA adoption, all
of which advances institutionalization in the EA context.

Third, EA studies are primarily focusing on the developed
countries contexts (Dang and Pekkola 2017; Simon,
Fischbach, and Schoder 2013). Recently, however, EA has
become of increasing interest around the world (Dang and
Pekkola 2017; Shanks et al. 2018), especially in the develop-
ing world (Dang and Pekkola 2017). Because only a few EA
studies have focused on developing countries (Dang and
Pekkola 2017), we thus contributes to this front. We argue that
our findings can be generalized to similar contexts in terms of
stakeholders and their values or organizational cultures, ad-
ministrative hierarchies, income, human capacity, ICT infra-
structure, and resources, such as another provinces, ministries,

and line of businesses no matter whether developed or devel-
oping country.

The paper also has practical implications. Our highlighting of
institutional factors at different phases enables practitioners to
design strategies to respond to different adoption challenges.
Table 4 may be thought of as a starting point for designing such
strategies. Managers should consider how to harmonize and bal-
ance their organizational values, norms, and rules between old
and new environments, which would benefit practitioners in
solving problems that emerge during the adoption process. In
contrast, if these issues are not taken into account, then a number
of challenges are likely to arise, often leading to the failure of EA
adoption. Having a better understanding of EA project activities
and institutional pressures will clarify the shaping of activities
and behaviors at both the organizational and the individual level,
which will help managers to better prepare for EA adoption.

One limitation of this study is that we have addressed only
two cases within a single country. Although this is mdeed a
limitation, understanding the context is also an important consid-
eration (Davison and Martinsons 2016). Consequently, even
though we have illuminated stakeholders’ behavior and activities
in this study, more research is still needed to illustrate the nuances
of these phenomena; for example, the relative importance of rules
and values may vary between organizations. While our focus on
EA adoption also suggests that the results are bound to the EA
context, we contend that the institutionalization of EA resembles
any socio-technical assemblage. Overall, then, our cases provide
a foundation for understanding the adoption of organization-
wide practices or technologies. In the future, we hope to combine
institutional perspectives with a cross-nation analysis to under-
stand problems in their wider context and to facilitate theoretical
and practical development.

Acknowledgments This study was partly funded by the Academy of
Finland, grant # [306000]. We would like to thank the editors and two
anonymous reviewers for their invaluable comments, which greatly
helped us improve the paper.

A previous version of this paper was presented at the 24th European
Conference on Information Systems (ECIS 2016), Istanbul, Turkey,

g) Springer
1444

research paper: 139, entitled “Institutionalising Enterprise Architecture in
the Public Sector in Vietnam’, http://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2016_ 1p/139.

Funding Information Open access funding provided by University of
Vaasa (UVA).

Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appro-
priate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.

References

Ajer, A. K., and Olsen, D. H. (2018). Enterprise Architecture Challenges:
A Case Study of Three Norwegian Public Sectors, in: European
Conference on Information Systems. Portsmouth, UK.

Alzoubi, Y. I., Gill, A. Q., & Moulton, B. (2018). A measurement model to
analyze the effect of agile Enterprise architecture on geographically dis-
tributed agile development. Journal of Software Engineering Research
and Development. https://doi.org/10.1186/s404 1 1-018-0048-2.

Armour, F. J., & Kaisler, S. H. (2001). Enterprise architecture: Agile
transition and implementation. /T Professional, 3(6), 30-37.

Armour, F. J., Kaisler, S. H., & Liu, S. Y. (1999). Building an Enterprise
architecture step by step. /T Professional, 1(4), 31-39.

Banaeianjahromi, N., & Smolander, K. (2017). Lack of communication and
collaboration in Enterprise architecture development. /nformation
Systems Frontiers. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-017-9779-6.

Bellman, B., & Rausch, F. (2004). Enterprise architecture for e-govern-
ment. In R. Traunmiiller (Ed.), Electronic government: Proceedings
of the 3rd [IFIP WG 8.5] international conference, EGOV 2004 (pp.
48-56). Spain: Zaragoza.

Benbasat, I., Goldstein, D. K., & Mead, M. (1987). The case research strategy
in studies of information systems. MIS Quarterly, 11(3), 369-386.
Berente, N., & Yoo, Y. (2012). Institutional contradictions and loose
coupling: Postimplementation of NASA’s Enterprise information

system. Information Systems Research, 23(2), 376-396.

Bharati, P., Zhang, C., & Chaudhury, A. (2014). Social media assimilation
in firms: Investigating the roles of absorptive capacity and institution-
al pressures. Information Systems Frontiers, 16(2), 257-272.

Bondar, S., Hsu, J. C., Pfoug, A., & Stjepandic, J. (2017). Agile digital
transformation of system-of-systems architecture models using
Zachman framework. Journal of Industrial Information
Integration, 7(September), 33-43.

Chandwani, R., & De, R. (2016). Doctor-patient interaction in telemedi-
cine: Logic of choice and logic of care perspectives. Information
Systems Frontiers, 19(4), 955-968.

Chatterjee, D., Grewal, R., & Sambamurthy, V. (2002). Shaping up for E-
commerce: Institutional enablers of the organizational assimilation
of web technologies. MIS Quarterly, 26(2), 65-89.

Cloutier, C., & Langley, A. (2013). The logic of institutional logics:
Insights from French pragmatist sociology. Journal of
Management Inquiry, 22(4), 360-380.

Dang, D. (2017). Enterprise architecture institutionalization: A tale of two
cases, in Proceedings of the 25th European Conference on
Information Systems (ECIS). Guimaraes, Portugal.

Dang, D. (2019). Institutional logics and their influence on enterprise
architecture adoption. Journal of Computer Information Systems,
1-11. https://doi.org/10.1080/08874417.2018.1564632.

Dang, D. D., & Pekkola, S. (2016). Institutionalising enterprise architec-
ture in the public sector in Vietnam, /n Proceedings of the 24th

g) Springer

Inf Syst Front (2020) 22:1433-1445

European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS). Istanbul,
Turkey.

Dang, D. D., & Pekkola, S. (2017). Systematic literature review on en-
terprise architecture in the public sector. Electronic Journal of e-
Government, 15(2), 130-154.

Dang, D., Vartiainen, T., and Pekkola, S. (2019). Patterns of Enterprise
Architecture Adoption in the Public Sector: A Resource-Based
Perspective, in: 27th European Conference on Information
Systems. Stockholm and Uppsala, Swenden.

Davison, R. M., & Martinsons, M. G. (2016). Context is king!
Considering particularism in research design and reporting.
Journal of Information Technology, 31(3), 241-249.

DiMaggio, P. J., & Powell, W. W. (1983). The iron cage revisited:
Institutional isomorphism and collective rationality in organizational
fields. American Sociological Review, 48(2), 147-160.

Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case study research.
Academy of Management Review, 14(4), 532-550.

Friedland, R., & Alford, R. R. (1991). Bringing society back in: Symbols,
practices, and institutional contradictions. In W. W. Powell & P. J.
DiMaggio (Eds.), The new institutionalism in organizational
analysis (pp. 232-263). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hjort-Madsen, K. (2007). Institutional patterns of enterprise architecture
adoption in government. Transforming Government: People,
Process and Policy, 1(4), 333-349.

Hjort-Madsen, K., & Gotze, J. (2004). Enterprise architecture in government -
Towards a multi-level framework for managing IT in government. Paper
presented at the Proceedings of ECEG04, Dublin, Ireland.

Hu, Q., & Huang, C. D. (2006). The rise and fall of the competitive local
exchange carriers in the U.S.: An institutional perspective.
Information Systems Frontiers, 8(3), 225-239.

Hylving, L., & Bygstad, B. (2019). Nuanced responses to Enterprise
architecture management: Loyalty, voice, and exit. Journal of
Management Information Systems, 36(1), 14-36.

Isomaki, H., & Liimatainen, K. (2008). Challenges of government enter-
prise architecture work — Stakeholders’ views. In M. A. Wimmer, H.
J. Scholl, & E. Ferro (Eds.), Electronic government: Proceedings of
the 7th [IFIP WG §&.5] international conference, EGOV 2008 (pp.
364-374). Italy: Turin.

Iyamu, T. (2009). The factors affecting institutionalisation of enterprise
architecture in the organisation. Paper presented at the IEEE
Conference on Commerce and Enterprise Computing (CEC '09),
pp. 221-225., Vienna, Austria.

Janssen, M., & Hjort-Madsen, K. (2007). Analyzing enterprise architecture in
national governments: The cases of Denmark and the Netherlands.
Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences, Waikoloa, HI, USA.

Jepperson, R. L. (1991). Institutions, institutional effects, and institution-
alization. In W. W. Powell & P. J. DiMaggio (Eds.), The new insti-
tutionalism in organizational analysis (pp. 143-163). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Jonkers, H., Lankhorst, M. M., Doest, H. W. L. t., Arbab, F., Bosma, H.,
& Wieringa, R. J. (2006). Enterprise architecture: Management tool
and blueprint for the organisation. Information Systems Frontiers,
&(2), 63-66.

Kappelman, L. A., & Zachman, J. A. (2013). The Enterprise and its
architecture: Ontology & Challenges. Journal of Computer
Information Systems, 53(4), 87-95.

Khalifa, M., & Davison, R. M. (2006). SME adoption of IT: The case of
electronic trading systems. JEEE Transactions on Engineering
Management, 53(2), 275-284.

Krell, K., Matook, S., & Matook, F. (2009). The effects of regulatory
pressure on information systems adoption success: An institutional
theorey pespecitve, European Conference on Information Systems
(ECTS), Verona, Italy.
Inf Syst Front (2020) 22:1433-1445

Lange, M., Mendling, J., & Recker, J. (2015). An empirical analysis of
the factors and measures of enterprise architecture management suc-
cess. European Journal of Information Systems, 25(5), 411-431.

Lee, J. D., & Kwon, Y. I. (2013). A study on strategy planning and
outcome of EA in Korea. Paper presented at the 15th International
Conference on Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT).

Liang, H., Saraf, N., Hu, Q., & Xue, Y. (2007). Assimilation of enterprise
systems: The effect of institutional pressures and the mediating role
of top management. MIS Quarterly, 31(1), 59-87.

Lohe, J., & Legner, C. (2014). Overcoming implementation challenges in
enterprise architecture management: A design theory for
architecture-driven IT management (ADRIMA). Information
Systems and e-Business Management, 12(1), 101-137.

Magnusson, J., & Nilsson, A. (2006). Infusing an architectural framework
with neo-institutional theory: reports from recent change manage-
ment initiatives within the Swedish public administration,
Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii International Conference
on System Sciences. Kauai, Hawaii, USA: IEEE.

Magoulas, T., Hadzic, A., Saarikko, T., & Pessi, K. (2012). Alignment in
enterprise architecture: A comparative analysis of four architectural
approaches. Electronic Journal Information Systems Evaluation,
15(1), 88-101.

Mahalingam, A., & Levitt, R. E. (2007). Institutional theory as a frame-
work for analyzing conflicts on global projects. Journal of
Construction Engineering and Management, 133(7), 517-528.

Mignerat, M., & Rivard, S. (2009). Positioning the institutional perspec-
tive in information systems research. Journal of Information
Technology, 24(4), 369-391.

Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis.
Thousand Oaks: Sage.

Myers, M. D. (1997). Qualitative research in information systems. M/S
Quarterly, 21(2), 241-242.

Niemi, E., & Pekkola, S. (2016). Enterprise architecture benefit realiza-
tion: Review of the models and a case study ofa public organization.
ACM SIGMIS Database, 47(3), 55-80.

Niemi, E., & Pekkola, S. (2017). Using enterprise architecture artefacts in
an organisation. Enterprise Information Systems, 11(3), 313-338.

Oliver, C. (1991). Strategic responses to institutional processes. Academy
of Management Review, 16(1), 145-179.

Orlikowski, W. J., & Barley, S. R. (2001). Technology and institutions:
What can research on information technology and research on orga-
nizations learn from each other? MIS Quarterly, 25(2), 145-165.

Orlikowski, W. J., & Baroudi, J. J. (1991). Studying information technol-
ogy in organizations: Research approaches and assumptions.
Information Systems Research, 2(1), 1-28.

Powell, W. W., & DiMaggio, P. J. (1991). The new institutionalism in
organizational analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ribeiro, J. A., & Scapens, R. W. (2006). Institutional theories in manage-
ment accounting change. Qualitative Research in Accounting &

Management, 3(2), 94-111.

Ross, J. W. (2009). Information technology strategy-creating a strategic IT
architecture competency: Learning in stages. In R. D. Galliers & D. E.
Leidner (Eds.), Strategic Information Management: Challenges and
Strategies in Managing Information Systems (pp. 584): Routledge.

Saha, P. (2008). Advances in government enterprise architecture.
Hershey, New York: Information Science Reference (IGI Global).

Schmidt, C., & Buxman, P. (2011). Outcomes and success factors of
Enterprise it architecture management: Empirical insight from the
international financial services industry. European Journal of
Information Systems, 20(2), 168-185.

1445

Scott, W. R. (2005). Institutional theory. In Encyclopedia of Social
Theory (pp. 408-414): Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Shah, H., & Kourdi, M. E. (2007). Frameworks for enterprise architec-
ture. IT Professional, 9(6), 36-41.

Shanks, G., Gloet, M., Someh, I. A., Frampton, K., & Tamm, T. (2018).
Achieving benefits with enterprise architecture. Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 27(2), 139-156.

Simon, D., Fischbach, K., & Schoder, D. (2013). An exploration of en-
terprise architecture research. Communications of the Association
for Information Systems, 32(1), 1-72.

Simon, D., Fischbach, K., & Schoder, D. (2014). Enterprise architecture
management and its role in corporate strategic management. /nf Syst
E-Bus Manage, 12(5), 5-42.

Stake, R. E. (2005). Qualitative Case Studies. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S.
Lincoln (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of qualitative research (3rd ed.,
pp. 443-466). Thousand Oaks: Saga.

Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research (2 ed.):
Saga, Thousand Oaks, Calif.

Suchman, M. C. (1995). Managing legitimacy: Strategic and institutional
approaches. Academy of Management Review, 20(3), 571-610.

Teo, T. S., & Pian, Y. (2003). A contingency perspective on internet
adoption and competitive advantage. European Journal of
Information Systems, 12(2), 78-92.

Walsham, G. (1995). Interpretive case studies in IS research: Nature and
method. European Journal of Information Systems, 4(2), 74-81.

Webster, J., & Watson, R. T. (2002). Analyzing the past to prepare for the
future: Writing a literature review. MIS Quarterly, 26(2), xiii-xxiil.

Weiss, S., Aier, S., & Winter, R. (2013). Institutionalization and the
effectiveness of enterprise architecture management. Paper present-
ed at the Thirty Fourth International Conference on Information
Systems, Milan, Italy.

Yoon, T. E., & George, J. F. (2013). Why aren’t organizations adopting
virtual worlds? Computers in Human Behavior, 29(3), 772-790.

Zheng, D. Q., Chen, J., Huang, L. H., & Zhang, C. (2013). E-government
adoption in public administration organizations: Integrating institu-
tional theory perspective and resource-based view. European
Journal of Information Systems, 22(2), 221-234.

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic-
tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Duong Dang , PhD, is Assistant professor at University of Vaasa,
Finland. His research interests include enterprise architecture, digital
transformation, IT management, IT governance, and digital strategy.
His research work has appeared in Information Systems Frontiers,
Journal of Computer Information Systems, Electronic Journal of e-
Government, International Series in Operations Research &
Management Science of Springer, and several leading IS conferences.

Samuli Pekkola , PhD, is Professor at Tampere University, Finland. His
research focuses on IS management and acquisition, and enterprise archi-
tectures and infrastructures, both in the context of public sector. His re-
search has appeared e.g. in ISJ, SJIS, BISE, EIS, EIM, DSS, CAIS, and
The DATA BASE. He serves on the editorial boards of Business
Information Systems and Engineering and Scandinavian Journal of
Information Systems. He is President of the Scandinavian Chapter of
the AIS.

g) Springer
