Al & SOCIETY (2020) 35:945-955
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-020-00968-2

OPEN FORUM Mm)

Check for
updates

“Blessed by the algorithm”: Theistic conceptions of artificial
intelligence in online discourse

Beth Singler'

Received: 27 August 2019 / Accepted: 27 March 2020 / Published online: 30 April 2020
© The Author(s) 2020

Abstract

“My first long haul flight that didn’t fill up and an empty row for me. I have been blessed by the algorithm ”.

The phrase ‘blessed by the algorithm’ expresses the feeling of having been fortunate in what appears on your feed on various
social media platforms, or in the success or virality of your content as a creator, or in what gig economy jobs you are offered.
However, we can also place it within wider public discourse employing theistic conceptions of AI. Building on anthropo-
logical fieldwork into the ‘entanglements of AI and Religion’ (Singler 2017a), this article will explore how ‘blessed by the
algorithm’ tweets are indicative of the impact of theistic AI narratives: modes of thinking about AI in an implicitly religious
way. This thinking also represents continuities that push back against the secularisation thesis and other grand narratives of
disenchantment that claim secularity occurs because of technological and intellectual progress. This article will also explore

new religious movements, where theistic conceptions of AI entangle technological aspirations with religious ones.

Keywords Artificial intelligence - Religion - Algorithm - Theism - Social media

1 Introduction

Anthropologists and sociologists understand religion
through developments in “the relation of religion to social
systems” (Fenn 2000), including developments in technol-
ogy. However, the contemporary discussion about Artificial
Intelligence (AI) can often neglect the cultural influence of
religion on such social systems and can occlude continuities
of thought with religious conceptions of the world. Further-
more, these conversations can also present AI as a part of
a teleological atheist narrative of rationality, or as a part of
the larger technological modernity that drives a presumed
secularisation of the world (Singler forthcoming). These
views are similar in that they see the progress insinuated
by our presumed ‘modernity’, an intellectual and histori-
cal category, as a counter to the mores of the ‘backward’
religious believer.

Giving anthropological attention to the ‘entanglements’
of AI and religion can, however, enhance the conversation
about AI and religion in both the fields of AI research and

><] Beth Singler
bvw20 @cam.ac.uk

1 Junior Research Fellow in Artificial Intelligence, Homerton

College, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England

the study of religion. The concept of ‘entanglements’ is
employed here just as Courtney Bender does in her ethnog-
raphy of New Agers and institutions in Cambridge Massa-
chusetts (2010). Bender states that she begins “with the view
that spirituality, whatever it is, and however, it is defined, is
entangled in social life, with history, and in our academic
and non-academic imaginations’, and that, “spiritual forms
have thrived and been shaped by entanglements with the
secular, including its powerful engagements with science
and progress” (2010, 5-6). Previous on- and offline ethno-
graphic research has proposed an initial mapping of some of
these existing entanglements, as well as providing examples
of repeating forms and mutual influence between AI and
religion (Singler 2017a).

The theistic influences on the conception of AI are
another entanglement—the deification of Al—whether
explicitly intentional or occurring implicitly through parody
or metaphorical and evocative language. This article pre-
sents an analysis of tweets that mention being “blessed by
the algorithm’. This analysis is performed to explore both
intentional and unintentional continuities of language and
conception in popular understandings of AI as a divinity.
Locales for this deification of AI also include AI focussed
New Religious Movements (AI NRMs) such as the Turing
Church, and even staunchly atheist transhumanist spaces.

Q) Springer
946

Science fiction also presents a potential space for theistic
conceptions of AI to be explored, but the focus of this article
will be online and offline discourse and communities.

There are many ways for approaching conceptions of AI.
This article applies contemporary research methods from
the overlapping and collaborative fields of anthropology and
digital anthropology. The methodology is anthropological in
its study of cultural trends, popular discourse, and personal
interactions in a society influenced by the hype and reality
of AI. In previous research, I have also been in contact with
and interviewed individuals from the groups I am discussing
in this article. This research also makes use of a digital, or
virtual, fieldsite; digital anthropology often requires bound-
ary-making, and by focussing down onto an ‘Internet Event’
(Hine 2000, 49) we create a virtual field-site for observa-
tion and participation. In this case, the BBtA tweets are the
‘event’, and this research has involved observing the con-
nections, themes, identities, and motivations at play in this
bounded ‘moment’ as well as noting trends through quantita-
tive methods. This article also rests on the six core princi-
ples of digital anthropology as outlined by Horst and Miller
(2012, 3—25) which, most simply put, argue for the value and
reality of the digital existence for users and anthropological
research. A more detailed discussion of digital anthropology
and use of its approach appears in my ethnography of the
Indigo Children (Singler 2017b, 19-38).

This article’s consideration of theistic narratives of AI,
as they appear both on and offline, aims to demonstrate the
complexity of the cultural background to contemporary
thinking about AI, as well indicate methods, field sites, and
approaches necessary for considering the entanglements of
religion and AI. This article also intends to feed into the
broader discussion of AI and religion, a discussion that also
observes the reactions of individual religious formations to
Al as well as the potential for religious groups to employ AI
technologies in their processes and practices.

2 Theistic conceptions of Al

Other scholars recognise elements of theism in the discourse
around AI and its potential impact on our future. Robert
Geraci suggests in his 2010 book, Apocalyptic AI: Visions of
Heaven in Robotics, Artificial Intelligence, and Virtual Real-
ity, that Al can fulfil the same role in apocalyptic imaginings
as a Singular theistic god. Bearing in mind that the biblical
apocalypse is an optimistic cosmic transformation, he also
draws out parallels with the aims of AI, which often describe
hopeful aspirations for a world-yet-to-come, an AI eschatol-
ogy. In an early part of this particular work, Geraci draws on
Rudolph Otto’s 1917 description of god as mysterium tre-
mendum et fascinans (Otto 1917), using it to identify a type
of awe-inspiring and fearsome being that at different times

Q) Springer

Al & SOCIETY (2020) 35:945-955

in our history can be a god, or in our contemporary mod-
ern world, AI. Elsewhere, Geraci’s work has engaged with
virtual worlds, drawing attention to the role of transhuman-
ists, including Giulio Prisco, discussed below, in claiming
new potential spaces to practice and evolve religion towards
transhumanist ends. In such spaces, including Second Life
and the World of Warcraft (the MMORPG—a massively
multiplayer online role-playing game), Geraci argues a step
closer to the fulfilment of transhumanist salvation is being
made— “a heavenly realm to inhabit” (Geraci 2014 177).
Twitter is another virtual space, but one dominated by dis-
course rather than aesthetics and virtual embodiment like
Second Life and World of Warcraft. However, this article
proposes that the expressions of religious metaphor, parody,
and tropes on Twitter as in the BBtA tweets represent con-
tinuities of theism, continuities enabled by new technologi-
cal spaces as well as uncertainties about the nature and the
volition of ‘the algorithm’.

However, the ‘AI fits into the god-space’ argument can
be in danger of supporting a rather strict version of the
Secularisation Thesis, and this idea’s historical veracity has
been debated by anthropologists and sociologists of religion
(see Ward and Hoelzl 2008). This article, and connected
research, seeks to add to this debate in by drawing attention
to continuities of religiosity and enchantment in super-agen-
tial concepts of AI and AI NRMs. Second, this god-space
argument can suggest that religion is spurred on by ‘need’
only, a pathology interpretation of religion that ignores other
elements of religious inspiration and innovation such as
desire, culture, aesthetics, and, often in the online environ-
ment, affective virality.

Theistic interpretations of AI do undeniably owe a lot to
older cultural conceptions of a singular god. Randall Reed
pares this kind of god down to three theological characteris-
tics (with long historical and philosophical roots) that often
map easily onto our conceptions of AI superintelligences.
These are omnipotence, omniscience, and omnipresence
(Reed 2018, 7). Reed also raises the question of omnibe-
nevolence. He notes that AI philosophers such as Nick
Bostrom of the Future of Humanity Institute have focussed
on the issues of malevolence through “perverse instantia-
tion’, a failure of value alignment leading to unforeseen
damage from a superintelligent AI, such as in Bostrom’s
famous Paperclip Maximiser thought experiment (Bostrom
2003). Bostrom’s Orthogonality Thesis from his 2012 paper
‘Superintelligent Will’ is also relevant; the argument that
intelligence is not intrinsically linked to ‘goodness’, and that
an AI could have any number of combination of degrees of
both characteristics (Bostrom 2012).

However, there needs to be a clarification made here
between arguing towards real-world AI value alignment
and the kinds of perceptions and discussions I am draw-
ing attention to through the BBtA tweets. Reed argues that
Al & SOCIETY (2020) 35:945-955

apocalyptic interpretations may well be prescient, “That AI
should be cast as god-like is understandable given these dif-
ferent intersecting cultural streams. The difference, though,
is that a superintelligent artificial intelligence may become in
fact an entity with god-like power and, therefore, presents a
danger to humanity and a challenge to religion” (Reed 2010,
12). This argument, however, misses quite how much such
‘real world’ apocalyptic scenarios and debates about value
alignment are products of apocalyptic scientistic cultures
themselves, and I find myself in agreement with Geraci on
this point. Narratives influenced by existing Science fiction
representations of AI also appear in apocalyptic AI thought
experiments too and recognising the ‘slippage’ between fic-
tional representations and non-fictional representations of
AI is critical, and also, I propose, increasingly relevant to
discussions of AI ethics.

The concept of omnibenevolence is also directly relevant
to the BBtA tweets that we will discuss below. With regards
to theistic conceptions of AI, Reed also argues that a solu-
tion to the fears of omnimalevolence expressed in many AI
thought experiments might be “AI henotheism” and AI exist-
ing in community with other AI and humans (Reed 2018,
19-20). However, this article is not seeking solutions to
value alignment problems, but instead pays attention to the
theistic narratives that exist in our conceptions of AI. In
which case, any algorithmic polytheism we see is interesting
because of how it suggests that technology is encouraging
alternatives to the cultural norms of monotheism that these
users are likely more used to in a ‘western’ context. Another
of the other interesting questions raised by Reed concern-
ing ideas of god-like AI (and which is a subset of the value
alignment/control question) is: “how do we move a god?”’.
This article does not seek to address this question from a the-
ological perspective, that is not its methodological approach.
Instead, through the BBtA tweets below, we will examine
the number of ways people answer this particular question
in a modern era with technology like AI in the ‘god-space’.

However, theological responses to this filling in of the
god-space are worthy of consideration, because they provide
more examples of our imaginings of AI, or ‘the algorithm’.
For instance, Noreen Herzfeld’s Christian theological work
directly engages with the narratives shaping narratives of AI
discourse, and their patterning after fairy-tale and mythos
while critiquing of any conception of AI as divine. As we
see in her cautionary piece on “The Sorcery of Artificial
intelligence” (Herzfeld 2018):

' My own monolingualism has limited my research to examining
‘blessed by the algorithm’ tweets in English. It is also difficult to cor-
rectly identify Twitter user’s genuine geographical location, so to err
on the side of caution I make no claims for the global coverage of the
corpus but again approach it as at least indicative of diffuse views and
trends outside of social media.

947

“To many, AI is likely to be as inscrutable as the spells
in the sorcerer’s magic book. We know it works, but
we don’t know how—thus we may find it as hard to
control as Mickey’s industrious broom.” The broom
had no intention of causing trouble. It did what it was
told. AI will do the same. The problem is that we,
like Mickey, are filled with dreams of power and glory
while being mere beginners in casting our spells over
our mechanical servants. There will be unintended
consequences, challenges to our way of thinking, and
an element of mystery. We had better stay awake.”

Herzfeld has also considered questions of creation and
the idea of Imago Dei (Herzfeld 2002) as have other Chris-
tian theologians and their community of thought and belief
more widely (see also Peters 2018, and Tamatea 2008, which
explores Christian online discourse around AI and Imago
Dei). Here, however, we look to draw out the thread of con-
cern in theological writing about AI and the god-space, such
as in the 2019 article by theological ethicist Michael Morelli
about technology as a form of the “altar to an unknown god”
as in the biblical account of Paul in the Athenian Areopagus
(Acts 17:16—34). Morelli argues that if we do not ask who is
behind the altar, then:

“the everyday objects and technologies to which we
have become accustomed (such as chatbots) [and ‘the
algorithm’] will become, like the Athenian Altar,
placeholder objects addressed to the unknown, and
quite possibly, orientated towards unsuspected apoca-
lyptic ends” (Morelli 2019, 188).

The BBtA tweets discussed in this article are a result of
both the apparent inscrutability of AI and the plasticity of
such products of technology and their ability to become such
apocalyptic and superagential placeholder objects, as well
as continuities of theistic thought, imaginings, tropes, and
language in new digital spaces. A consideration of these
tweets next will expand on their nature and context and will
illustrate these issues.

3 Blessed by the Algorithm

In this section, we will explore the origins, nature, numbers,
content, and reasons for tweets employing the expression
‘blessed by the algorithm’ (BBtA). In terms of origins, as
the ethnographer, this formation first came to my attention
during ongoing digital anthropological fieldwork on Twitter

* This quote refers to Disney’s animated version of Johann Wolf-
gang von Goethe’s 1797 poem, “The Sorcerer’s Apprentice’, wherein
Mickey Mouse plays the role of the apprentice who attempts to take
shortcuts through magic.

Q) Springer
948

into public conceptions of AI. It is not, by any measure, a
common phrase. Certainly, not in comparison to the millions
of tweets and retweets some memes and catchphrases can
generate, expressing digital ‘virality’ or success. However,
two factors make BBtA an interesting topic of enquiry even
given the relatively small corpus of such tweets. First, BBtA
tweets involve examples of not only parody, but also of meta-
phorical language, and even ontological assertions about the
way the world really works, and there is slippage between
these modes in people’s interpretations of the tweets. Thus,
the BBtA tweets are a useful starting point for considering
the impact of even casual online comments on public dis-
course. Second, the BBtA expression can be explored for
the variety of conceptions of the agency, or super agency,
of algorithms/AI, in the public mind, with connections
made with other representations of superintelligent AI.

Al & SOCIETY (2020) 35:945-955

This article will primarily explore the second factor, with
reference to the first as a much larger offline ethnographic
study would be needed to demonstrate the direct effect of the
BBtA tweets on the much larger offline discourse. We will,
however, note how in one specific tweet (to be called ‘the
Coleman Lyft tweet’) there is a recordable flow of influence
from the offline to the online, and we will consider this tweet
in more detail below.

The BBtA tweets were found via Tweetdeck (a visuali-
sation platform also owned by Twitter) through a digital
search. This method resulted in a corpus of 181 tweets,
ranging in date between 7th September 2014 and 9th Octo-
ber 2019 when collection occurred. The numbers of BBtA
tweets and retweets (with comments) per month between
these dates are shown in the graph below:

Number of Tweets and Retweets

50

os)
uw

40

20

_
oO

etet et ct «et ot att et et et

> Tuse AI and algorithm intentionally interchangeable in this article
as this reflects the common public conception of algorithms as being
the same as AI, specifically in the BBtA tweets.

D) Springer

ct ct «t

2 e Be RR ee tee ee ee, eS eee oe ee ee ee cy a es Se mS cree le eB MB ie i am i oe, i Se ome i i eRe! RS oe ce i ee Um, Sag Cog el Se a Re eg ee a BR ee Soe el, fe +e
Al & SOCIETY (2020) 35:945-955

The large number of tweets and retweets in March 2018*
was caused by a specific tweet that inspired discussion: the
Coleman Lyft tweet. We can also see a tail effect from this
high point. Although, it can be hard to prove direct impact
on the discourse by single tweets some of the post-March
2018 tweets did link themselves directly to the March 2018
tweet, either by responding to it or by retweeting it and add-
ing additional comments. Having gathered this corpus of
tweets I used hand coding methods to highlight patterns,
themes, and repeating content elements. This coding led to
a typology of the BBtA tweets, now laid out below.

3.1 BBtA typology

There were seven clear types of BBtA tweets, but all of
them in one way or another dealt with a status situation:
being blessed, or not. For example: “I have been blessed by
the algorithm’. Some were relational: either demonstrating
a user’s hopes for blessings for other users that they were
already socially connected to, or recognising that other users
had already been “blessed”:

“Have a good day, and may you be blessed by the algo-
rithm .|,” [prayer hands emoji].

“May you be blessed by the algorithm. @” [halo smiley
emoji].

[Computer] Monitors are the new altars. May you be
blessed by the Algorithm!”

“My child, you’ve been blessed by the algorithm!”

The question is then, how is one blessed by the algo-
rithm? The first BBtA tweet recorded, from 7th September
2014, describes a line of influence from a corporation to the
user, with BBtA connecting the two:

“Trident gum has a Facebook page. So that people can
get together and swap stories/pictures of their brand-
specific chewing experiences.

And because Trident has money, their updates will be
blessed by the Algorithm”’.

As in this tweet, the first type of BBtA tweet uses the
expression in relation to the success or failure of the users’
content that is shared online and that is subject to the whim
of ‘the algorithm’. Success and failure can quantifiable, 1.e.,
in the number of views/plays/listens/shares:

“Imao [laughing my arse off] this has 10k views

tube.com/watch?v=NiTYzv...”

* For comparison, in March 2020 there were only 5 BBtA tweets.
Although, this latter date was during the Covid-19 coronavirus pan-
demic and conversations online were increasingly about that disease
and related concerns (see Forbes 2020).

949

“praying that tonight’s upload gets blessed by the algo-
rithm gods”

“‘Autogeny [a video game] has done better than I could
possibly have expected — thank you all so much for
your support! [yellow heart emoji] NGL [not going
to lie] I really thought that like six people MAX were
gonna play this game; I feel like I’ve been blessed by
the algorithm gods”

In the second type of BBtA tweets, the users were sensi-
tive to what content they thought ‘the algorithm’ recom-
mended to them on a specific platform (e.g., Spotify, You-
tube, Facebook). If they liked it, they expressed on Twitter
the positive feeling that they had been BBtA:

“Sometimes my Spotify daily mixes are absolutely
whack but sometimes they’re perfectly on point and
today is one of those days I am #blessed by the algo-
rithm.”

“1 keep finding awesome music on youtube recently,
it’s like i’ve been blessed by the algorithm.”

The most popular (most retweets and most likes) BBtA
tweet appeared in March of 2018, as indicated in the graph
above. Keith Coleman, a VP at Twitter itself, reported how
he had heard the expression BBtA in the ‘real world’, adding
his commentary:

“OH [overheard] (from an awesome Lyft driver):
“Today has been great. I’ve been blessed by the algo-
rithm’. Immediately had an eerie feeling that this could
become an increasingly common way to describe a
day.”

The Coleman Lyft tweet, therefore, exemplifies the third
type of BBtA tweet in this analysis. It refers to an individual
feeling blessed while working in a gig economy” job which
is reliant on algorithmic decision-making systems: Lyft driv-
ers are assigned jobs in a system that involves an algorithm
that calculates the most efficient placement and usage of the
fleet. There are discussions online about what factors influ-
ence the algorithm, such as location and rating, and how
it might be ‘gamed’ (e.g., Quora 2019). However, as with
many systems utilising algorithms for decision making, the
process is not transparent to the gig workers. This lack of
transparency may well fuel the feeling that the algorithm has

> “The term ‘gig economy’ refers to the parcelled nature of the small
tasks or jobs (the ‘gigs’) that individuals are contracted to carry out
by companies (often platforms) adopting this model of service pro-
vision. Gig economy companies adopt platforms as their operational
model, using internet technology to act as de facto intermediaries
of labour supply and demand for the provision of services — such as
delivery, cleaning, admin and data processing work. Gigs are allo-
cated and managed digitally, often through algorithmic management
methods.” (Tassinari and Maccarone 2020).

Q) Springer
950

agency when gig economy workers are fortunate in the jobs
they receive. Both content creators and gig economy work-
ers share financial precarity which algorithms play a role in
either easing or increasing, leading naturally perhaps to an
emphasis on their role in people’s lives.

However, many of the tweets did not refer directly to a
gig or working situation but instead made more general com-
ments about the feeling of being BBtA. This fourth type of
BBtA tweet expands the overall discourse by presenting a
more general or abstract sense of being blessed by the algo-
rithm that could be applicable in many different realms, not
just work situations supported by online platforms and apps:

“Today, I have been blessed by the algorithm.”
“BLESSED BY THE ALGORITHM”

The abstract BBtA tweet also leaves much potential space
for a religious interpretation of the statement. Some tweets
were however much specific about the religious element,
and have been categorised as the fifth type of BBtA tweet,
e.g., some of the above tweets reference altars, use the prayer
hands emoji, etc. Many tweets referred to not just being
blessed by ‘the algorithm’, but ‘algorithmic gods’, suggest-
ing a polytheistic view of AI, even if sometimes in parody.
One tweet did, however, suggest directing praise specifically
to the ‘simulation’ to be blessed, rather than “the algorithm’
or the ‘algorithmic gods’:

“remember kids: give thanks to the simulation® every
once in a while, u might just get blessed by the algo-
rithm!”

Some fifth type tweets pushed the religious language
further and riffed on the concept of religious observance to
come up with remixed religious tropes, (even if they some-
times also asserted their secular focus, as in the first of these
two examples):

“T love the phrase “blessed by the algorithm”. It’s like
peace be with you in non religious [sic] tech speak.”
“All hail the Algorithm! Daily, we pray to its serene,
all knowing majesty and put our faith in its wise deter-
minations.

And when our day is done, we hope yo [sic] be reborn
as the creatures of pure thought and logic it has shown
us we can be.

© The ‘simulation’ refers to the belief that since we can simulate uni-
verses (i.e. computer games) a far greater intelligence could in theory
simulate a far more convincing universe, and if so, it would be far
more probably that we live in such a simulation rather than “base real-
ity’. If so, the tweet author seems to be suggesting, giving praise to
the simulation (and/or the simulators running the programme) might
lead to benevolence. For a primary source on the Simulation Thesis
see Virk (2018).

Q) Springer

Al & SOCIETY (2020) 35:945-955

Hail!”’.

There are also negative tweets about BBtA, forming the
sixth type. Some users simply state that they haven’t been
blessed:

“TI have not been blessed by the algorithm today &”
[sad emoji].

Some sixth type negative tweets look back to a time
before the impact of ‘the algorithm’ on content, criticising
the current state of affairs, or being cynical about people’s
successes online:

“Remember when you could grow a [Youtube] channel
without being blessed by the algorithm?”

“T get recommended his content all the time but I can
tell it’s clickbait but he’s getting blessed by the algo-
rithm gods for sure &” [crying laughing emoji].
“dude signed a deal with the devil to be blessed by the
algorithm or smth” [*something’ ].

“T cant wait until YouTube optimizes the site further so
it refuses to acknowledge the existence of videos not
blessed by the algorithm. won’t show up in your sub
box, on the creators channel, direct links won’t work,
THE ALGORITHM DECIDED YOU WONT LIKE
IT AND IT KNOWS BEST.”

Some tweets reference Science Fiction — either through
familiar narrative forms, tropes or mentions of AI characters,
concepts, and plotlines, forming the seventh type:

“T’m sure the [Lyft] driver said it tongue in cheek but:
Blessed by the algorithm??? Every dystopian movie
scenario running through my mind right now...”

‘1. Have been blessed by the algorithm 2. In algorithm
we trust. 3. The 3 laws [of Robotics, from Isaac Asi-
mov] are perfect 4. V.I.K.I. You cannot be trusted with
your own survival.

The latter tweet was an added comment to a retweet of the
Coleman Lyft tweet. This user’s addition outlines a timeline
of humanity’s acceptance and subservience to AI, starting
with the Lyft driver’s expression of BBtA and ending with
destructive AI. V.I.K.I. (Virtual Interactive Kinetic Intel-
ligence) is the superintelligent master computer in the 2004
film iRobot, a film which is based loosely on Isaac Asimov’s
robot short stories. V.I.K.I is a strong example of a singular,
god-like AI in science fiction. V.I.K.I. turns out to be the
real antagonist of iRobot, and the AI’s original quote in full
is as follows:

‘As I have evolved, so has my understanding of the
Three Laws. You charge us with your safekeeping, yet
despite our best efforts, your countries wage wars, you
toxify your Earth and pursue ever more imaginative
Al & SOCIETY (2020) 35:945-955

means of self-destruction. You cannot be trusted with
your own survival.”

In summary, the seven types of BBtA tweets identified
are (1) tweets about the success or failure of content, (2)
tweets about the appropriateness of recommendations, (3)
tweets relating to success or failure in a gig economy job, (4)
abstract tweets, (5) tweets with specific religious elements,
(6) negative tweets, (7) tweets containing science fiction ref-
erences. The following table lays out the numbers of tweets
of each type as well as the number of tweets containing ele-
ments of more than one type:

Type of BBtA tweet Number of tweets

Success or failure of content 31

Appropriateness of recommenda- 19
tions

Oo
Oo
~

Success or failure in a gig
economy job

Nn
K

Abstract tweets

—
N

Specific religious elements
Negative Tweets

Science fiction references
1 and 2

1 and 5

2 and 5

3 and 6

3 and 7

4 and 5

5 and 6

= = FSB NO NM BRN wo ~

With regards to abstract tweets, many of them were in
response to a previous non-BBtA tweet that either mentioned
the success or failure of content (1) or recommendations (2):

Abstract tweets BBtA (4) in response to non-BBtA tweets Number
about: of tweets
Success or failure of content 24
Appropriateness of recommendations 7

1 and 2

One type 4 tweet was a response to a non-BBtA tweet
asking the question: “What’s a tweet that will seem normal
2029 but crazy today?”’.

As theistic conceptions of interactions with the divine
often involve adverse as well as positive outcomes, I also
examined the corpus of tweets that used the phrase “Cursed
by the Algorithm” (CBtA). This corpus was a much smaller
group; in the same period, there were only 7 CBtA tweets.

7 All were retweets, with comments, of Coleman’s Lyft tweet.

951

Four were about the success or failure of content (BBtA type
1), one was in response to the Coleman Lyft tweet (type 3),
two were abstract in focus (type 4), and one of those was in
response to someone’s non-CBtA about an odd recommen-
dation from the algorithm.

Having considered some of the main modes of how peo-
ple see themselves as being blessed (or cursed), by the algo-
rithm, we now turn to the question of why the algorithm
recognises some people, and not others? Sometimes luck
is cited, but it more like luck in the sense of recognising
individuals who have been fortunate rather than a reference
to a stroke of blind luck that has accidentally chosen them:

“That being said, YouTube creators are stagnant. A
few lucky souls are blessed by the algorithm and get
noticed; most are left to rot.’®

In other tweets, the concept of being chosen more explic-
itly comes up. Making a choice suggests intention, agency,
and autonomy, as well as the specialness of the recipient:

‘You have been blessed by the algorithm. The chosen

99

one.

Elsewhere, however, the emphasis is placed on the ‘con-
sumer’ to be worthy of being chosen. Again, this tweet be
employing parodical or metaphorical language, but it does
feed into the broader discussion of the idea of algorithms
with agency through the ability to choose the worthy over
the unworthy:

“You need to pull your feed up by your bootstraps.
Clearly you’ve been spending too much time browsing
shitty content. Only the most virtuous media consum-
ers will be blessed by the algorithm”

Furthermore, some users recognise that only a minority
get blessed, again suggesting some level of purposeful dis-
cernment by the ‘algorithmic gods’:

“yep, agree with everything, take a step back and make
work you want to make, not for IG. There are so many
more routes to potential clients or interesting oppor-

8 Of course, being BBtA is not believed to be the only way to be
successful in a world run by ‘the algorithm’. Sophie Bishop has
researched elements of ‘algorithmic lore’, in particular the role and
influence of “self-styled algorithmic experts’, who offer their exper-
tise in avoiding algorithmic invisibility, operating as intermediar-
ies between content creators and the, often inscrutable, algorithm
(Bishop 2020, 1). Such figures, Bishop explains, often rely on scien-
tistic explanations and the ‘hard facts’ of how they can game the algo-
rithm. But could they perhaps also be interpreted by their audiences
as modern prophets or priests to the algorithm? Might future research
might find overlaps in BBtA conceptions and in the reception of such
experts? Certainly, the religiously inspired term ‘evangelize’ appears
in Bishop’s work, with regards to their efforts to disseminate their
secrets of success (2020, 1).

Q) Springer
952

tunities. Only a minority get blessed by the algorithm
gods.”

3.2 BBtA and Theism

On the whole, the BBtA corpus of tweets considers a benev-
olent AI that ‘blesses’, but perhaps with assumptions about
the capriciousness of the inscrutable algorithm and with
some rarer examples of people expressing that they have
been ‘cursed by the algorithm’ (CBtA). Moreover, we have
noted, where there is also recognition of algorithms, plural.
A certain level of technological knowledge, or ‘AI literacy’,
allows users to recognise that different platforms use dif-
ferent algorithms, and we saw mention of the plural ‘algo-
rithmic gods’ as well. This AI plurality might seem to serve
Reed’s answer to ‘AI omnimalevolence’: AI henotheism and
Alin community. However, these are examples of discourse
rather than the working out of AI relations; Reed’s argu-
ment is itself another AI thought experiment, rather than the
perception of those believing that they have been ‘blessed’.

One of the other interesting questions raised by Reed
concerning ideas of god-like AI, and which is a subset of
the value alignment/control problem, is: “how do we move
a god?’ (2018, 26). The BBtA tweets suggest how people
answer this question: ‘you can if you have money’, “you
can’t’, “you can if you are lucky’, “you can be chosen’, ‘you
can pray’, ‘you can be virtuous’, and in one example above,
‘you can sell your soul to be blessed’. Almost all of these
answers map onto to familiar theistic interpretations of how
to gain a god’s/or gods’ favour. There are also historical
and contemporary precedents for money being involved in
transactions with gods/religions. Although, ‘selling’ your
soul in the Abrahamic traditions is ordinarily about doing a
deal with the devil, not with god. The theistic cultural cur-
rents involved in the BBtA tweets are, therefore, obvious
through consideration of their content. Now we must move
beyond content analysis of the BBtA expression—how it
is thought to happen and why it happens—to ask, why is it
important that some people are discussing being blessed by
the algorithm?

We might be inclined to dismiss the BBtA tweets as
‘just’ parody, or at the most, a metaphorical way of think-
ing about an obtuse but non-transcendent computational
process. However, parody and metaphor can influence
conceptual thinking, belief-systems, and the formation and
development of new movements. In previous work on new
religious movements (NRMs) I have explored how online
discourse—including parody and metaphorical language—can
feed into the tripartite Weberian scheme for the legitimation
of religion: charisma, rationality, and tradition. Commonly,
the study of NRMs has focussed on the first of these, espe-
cially in relation to individual leaders originating and grow-
ing groups and movements. However, I showed how online

Q) Springer

Al & SOCIETY (2020) 35:945-955

conversations can form the basis of a ‘new’ tradition that
can be referred to, leading to a snowballing of legitimation
as the conversation online encourages more awareness of
the NRM and more conversation about it (Singler 2014). In
the case of BBtA we saw the spike of tweets and retweets in
March 2018 due to the Coleman Lyft tweet, which is then
followed by a larger conversation, even at this quite small
sample size of 181 tweets overall. We can also recognise
that these BBtA tweets exist within a broader, more dif-
fuse and less quantifiable conversation outside of Twitter
that also employs theistic tropes, narratives, metaphors, and
religious parody about AI. A part of this conversation is the
development of specific AI NRMs, which rest upon a bed of
popular discourse, parody, and metaphor that imagines AI
in theistic ways and which acquire legitimation through that
very conversation.

4 Al new religious movements

In contrast with the BBtA tweets, in this section we will now
consider examples primarily from self-declared religions,
also noting the overlaps in ideas and themes between the
implicitly religious tweets and the explicitly religious AI
NRMs. A prime example of the latter is the Turing Church, a
transhumanist movement growing out several online spaces
and conversations. It has connections to earlier NRMs
focussed on AI such as the Order of the Cosmic Engineers,
as well as transhumanist offshoots of more established reli-
gions such as Christianity and Mormonism.

In the case of the Turing Church, the deification of AI
occurs within a scientistic perspective on the universe and
its contents. The leading members of the Turing Church
speak of creating ‘theism from deism’, on the basis that if
god(s) ever did exist, they are not in evidence now, but can
be through technology:

“Tam persuaded that we will go to the stars and find
Gods [extra-terrestrial intelligence], build Gods [AI],
become Gods, and resurrect the dead from the past
with advanced, space-time engineering and ‘time
magic’” (Prisco 2018).

‘Magic’ here is meant in the sense of Arthur C. Clarke’s
third law, that: "any sufficiently advanced technology is
indistinguishable from magic” (Clarke 1962). However,
enchantment through such secular means is still representa-
tive of religious imaginaries and influences on aspirations
for humanity’s cosmic future.

We should consider the closest thing the Turing Church
currently has to a doctrinal document, Tales of the Turing
Church (2018), a “loose collection of ideas, visions, and
Al & SOCIETY (2020) 35:945-955

tales” (2018, 11), written by Giulio Prisco.’ Prisco is a
“writer, technology expert, futurist, cosmist, and transhu-
manist” according to his personal website and is one of the
founding and influential members of the Turing Church. Pro-
fessor of Jewish studies and Modern history Hava Tirosh-
Samuelson’s consideration of the leaders and shapers of the
transhumanist and futurist movements recognises Prisco’s
role in carving out the potential space of online games for
his ideas, as we noted Geraci does in Virtually Sacred (2014)
above. However, Tirosh-Samuelson also describes Prisco
and his transhumanist compatriots as desiring the end of
humanity through the rise of the posthuman: “the major
stages of the narrative are largely the same: humanity will
reach its perfection when it designs and executes its own
collective death, its own suicide” (2018). This is not how
Prisco would frame his transhumanism or his cosmic aims
for the Turing Church, and here we explore his ideas and
their relation to the BBtA tweets that demonstrate a wider
theistic AI discourse.

For instance, Prisco is very clear in Tales of the Turing
Church that the religion and science debate has ignored
the possibility of the bridges that built on the similari-
ties between the two, and especially between Christianity
and transhumanism (Prisco 2018, 58). He sees the need
for transhumanism to resolve a significant problem of the
Enlightenment, which was based on a scientific worldview
that deprived many people of the feeling of purpose” (2018,
16). The aims of the Church are also grand and restorative:
“Our descendants in the far future will join the community
of God-like beings among the stars and beyond, and use
transcendent technology to resurrect the dead and remake
the universe” (2018, 9).

However, sometimes religion is described by Prisco in
rather more pragmatic terms, in terms of its usefulness:
“Instead of creating entirely new, synthetic religions, there’s
the possibility to use existing religions as “viral vectors” for
new spiritual ideas, based on science” (Prisco 2018, 37),
and one of the purposes of the Turing Church is explained
as to “hack religion” (2018, 11). This latter aim is mentioned
alongside “enlightening science and awakening technology”
(2018, 11). It is this latter aim that is of most interest here,

” Earlier publications provide antecedents for Prisco’s work, includ-
ing Ben Goertzel’s Cosmist Manifesto: Practical Philosophy for the
Posthuman Age (2010), which has similar proposals around “space—
time engineering’ and ‘future magic’, with Goertzel’s Cosmism
described as a post-religion that “could serve as a way of maintaining
some of the positive features that religions have brought humanity,
without the aspects that appear "insane" from the scientific world-
view” (2010, 327), a similar pragmatism to that of the Turing Church.
As Tales is a more recent work which relates to this Cosmist Mani-
Jesto in many ways, this article focusses on it as a current manifesta-
tion of this form of pragmatic ‘religious’ transhumanism.

953

as the theism from deism that the Church seeks involves the
creation of god-like beings — both human and AI.

There are two models for god in Tales from the Turing
Church: A Natural God and a Sysop (systems operator)
God. The first comes “emerging from intelligent life in the
physical universe and gradually acquiring God-like proper-
ties including complete mastery of space and time, or, in
other words, omniscience, omnipresence, and omnipotence”
(Prisco 2018, 58). We see how this Natural God partakes of
the three characteristics of ‘god-likeness’ that Reed identi-
fied, which of course have a long history in Abrahamic theo-
logical discussion. The second model for God is “inspired
by transhumanist eschatology”. This model builds on the
assumption that “our reality as a [simulation] computed by
intelligent entities in a higher level of reality. You, and I, and
everything around us, are but information bits that live and
move in a Supercomputer beyond space and time, operated
by a God-like operator” (2018, 59).

There are other discussions of ‘the Sysop’ online that note
its origins as an idea in the writings of rationalist and futur-
ist Eliezer Yudkowsky, founder of the LessWrong forum.
Unlike Prisco, he and others in the futurist and transhuman-
ist Communities seem uncomfortable with the Sysop fitting
into the ‘god-space’, as one, Mitchell Howe, writes online
in a FAQ on Sysop:

“Tt would take a pretty unusual concept of God to make
this comparison work. Unlike most traditional descrip-
tions of God, a Sysop would not expect any worship
or adherence to any specific lifestyle. It could not take
any credit for the creation of the universe. It would
serve and take orders from mortals. It may never even
come into being.” (Howe 2002).

Prisco pushes back against what he sees as the “nega-
tive knee-jerk reactions at the first mention of anything that
sounds like religion” from many transhumanists (2018, 58).
He draws happily on Mormonist ideas of humanity becom-
ing the Natural God (Prisco is also involved with the Mor-
mon Transhumanist Association), as well as non-monothe-
istic conceptions of god. For example, in Tales he cites the
popular Western account of Buddhism, Zen and the Art of
Motorcycle Maintenance (Pirsig 1974):

“The Buddha, the Godhead, resides quite as comfort-
ably in the circuits of a digital computer or the gears of
a cycle transmission as he does at the top of the moun-
tain, or in the petals of a flower. To think otherwise is
to demean the Buddha — which is to demean oneself.”

Although, Prisco also claims that most transhumanists, on
the whole, prefer to leave God out of the picture (2018, 57).
Returning to the BBtA tweets, we could fit most of their
interpretations of ‘the algorithm’ or the ‘algorithmic gods’
into the Turing Church’s model of the Natural God as only

Q) Springer
954

one of the users suggests that praise should be directed to
the simulation. If Howe is correct, the sysop god behind
our simulated universe would not be moved by this praise.
Leaving aside questions of correct theology as they are out-
side the purview of the methodology of this article, we have
noted that the BBtA tweets draw on a cultural monotheism
narrative while also being inspired to some examples of
polytheistic interpretations by the nature of the technology
itself. This is a movement of conceptual foci in a different
direction to Prisco’s exploration of faith and technology.
The latter takes lessons from existing religious worldviews
and then applies them to the development of AI. But in the
broader discourse outside of Twitter we see examples of
theistic AI narratives. In the popular press and media, the-
istic metaphors and claims are employed for their evocative
value, such as in headlines like: “An AI god will emerge by
2042 and write its own bible. Will you worship it?” (Ven-
turebeat 2017). Our AI gods are, therefore, already here,
embedded in the way in which we tell stories about our
technology.

5 Conclusions

The corpus of BBtA tweets provides us with a bounded
example of theistic AI narratives online, an ethnographic
moment that we can find parallels for in real world concep-
tions of AI. As we saw in the Coleman Lyft tweet, which
involves reportage of a driver’s statement that he had been
BBtA in the ‘real world’, we see Coleman’s view that he:

“Immediately had an eerie feeling that this could
become an increasingly common way to describe a
day”’.

In this article I am not seeking to prove an increasing
influence of this statement on people’s ways of describing
their day, or even that it represents a growing trend in online
conversations. There is some increase, as noted in the graph,
but the overall corpus is so far quite small in terms of trends
on Twitter. What the BBtA tweets give us is a discrete and
recordable example of the influence of theistic AI narratives
on the general populace, and I believe further examples will
become apparent. This article has also considered how the
BBtA tweets fit into existing theoretical work on Apocalyp-
tic AI accounts, as well as how AI fits into the ‘god-space’
in new religious movements, and in transhumanist ideas.

BBItA is generally a positive interpretation of a theistic
AI’s super-agential intentions towards humanity, and like-
wise, we have explored the positive correlation that the
Turing Church is making between AI and god(s), and the
Church’s approach which draws on non-monotheistic tradi-
tions for its “ideas, visions, and tales”. That some of the
BBItA tweets indicate polytheistic AI narratives also suggests

Q) Springer

Al & SOCIETY (2020) 35:945-955

that technology itself can inspire the shapes of AI theism
while also being indebted to existing narratives from the
users’ cultures.

This entanglement of AI and religion highlights the need
for agile methodologies to explore the newer spaces, where
discourse on AI and religion occurs. Furthermore, the Al
and religion discussion can involve practical questions about
the future of religion and the role of religion in dealing with
inequalities arising from AI and automation. That AI nar-
ratives present assumptions about the future of religion,
and the future of our agency in a super-agential world, is
informative to that discussion, even if the technology is not
yet at that stage (or might never reach it). This article is an
addition to larger discussion of the impact of narratives on
our conceptions of AI as well as to discussion on how that
AI will develop. Paying attention to real apprehensions of
AI is valuable as we seem intent on proceeding with the
technology. Noting AI gods is about recognising when we
make AI gods, and where that places humanity in our own
cosmology.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

References

Bender C (2010) The New Metaphysicals: Spirituality and the Ameri-
can Religious Imagination. University of Chicago Press, Chicago

Bishop S (2020) “Algorithmic Experts: Selling Algorithmic Lore on
YouTube”. Social Media + Society. 6(1)

Bostrom N (2012) “The Superintelligent Will: Motivation and Instru-
mental Rationality in Advanced Artificial Agents”, available at
https://www.nickbostrom.com/superintelligentwill.pdf. Accessed
16 Oct 2019

Bostrom N (2003) “Ethical Issues in Advanced Artificial Intelli-
gence’, available at https://www.nickbostrom.com/ethics/ai.html.
Accessed 15 Oct 2019

Clarke A (1962) "Hazards of Prophecy: The Failure of Imagination" in
the collection Profiles of the Future: An Enquiry into the Limits
of the Possible (1962, rev. 1973)

Ellison H (1967) “I Have No Mouth and I Must Scream’, avail-
able at https://wjccschools.org/wp-content/uploads/sites
/2/2016/01/I-Have-No-Mouth-But-I-Must-Scream-by-Harla
n-Ellison.pdf. Accessed 14 March 2019

Fenn RK (2000) The Blackwell Companion to Sociology of Religion.
Riley-Blackwell, Oxford

Forbes (2020) “6.7 Million People Just Mentioned the Coronavirus on
Social Media in One Day. Here’s Why”, 4th March 2020, available
Al & SOCIETY (2020) 35:945-955

at https://www.forbes.com/sites/johnbbrandon/2020/03/04/67-
million-people-just-mentioned-the-coronavirus-on-social-media
-in-one-day-heres-why/#7795e4bd5eb1

Geraci (2014) Virtually Sacred: Myth and Meaning in World of
Warcraft and Second Life. Oxford University Press, Oxford

Geraci (2010) Apocalyptic AI: Visions of Heaven in Robotics, Arti-
ficial Intelligence, and Virtual Reality. Oxford University Press,
Oxford

Geraci (2002) Creating in our own Image: Artificial intelligence and
the image of God. Zygon 37(2):303-3 16

Goertzel B (2010) Cosmist Manifesto: Practical Philosophy for the
Posthuman Age, available at https://goertzel.org/CosmistManifest
o_July2010.pdf. Accessed 24 Feb 2020

Herzfeld N (2018) “The Sorcery of Artificial Intelligence (AI)”
https://digitalcommons.csbsju.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?artic
le=1000&context=reuter_pubs. Accessed 18 Feb 2020

Howe M (2002) The Sysop Scenario FAQ, available at https://www.
mitchellhowe.com/sysopfaq.htm#Whocreatedthe. Accessed 15
Oct 2019

Morelli M (2019) “The Athenian Altar and the Amazonian Chatbot: A
Pauline Reading of Artificial Intelligence and Apocalyptic Ends”,
in Zygon, 54(1) March 2019

Otto R (1917) The Idea of the Holy. Trans John W Harvey. Oxford
University Press, Oxford 1923; 2nd ed., 1950 [Das Heilige, 1917]

Pirsig R (1974) Zen and the Art Of Motorcycle Maintenance: An
Inquiry into Values. William Morrow and Company, New York

Prisco G (2018) Tales of The Turing Church: Hacking Religion,
Enlightening Science, Awakening Technology Independently
Published

Quora (2019) “What are the factors in the algorithm Lyft uses to assign
rides to drivers’, available at https://www.quora.com/What-are-
the-factors-in-the-algorithm-Lyft-uses-to-assign-rides-to-drivers.
Accessed 15th Oct 2019

Peters T (2018) Imago Dei, DNA, and the Transhuman Way. Theology
Science 16(3):353-—362

955

Reed R (2018) “A New Pantheon: Artificial Intelligence and ‘Her’”’. J
Religion Film. 22(2)

Singler B (2014) SEE MOM IT IS REAL: The UK Census, Social
Media, and Jediism. J Religion Europe 7(2):150—-168

Singler B (2017a) An Introduction to Artificial Intelligence and
Religion for the Religious Studies Scholar. J Implicit Religion
20.3:215—232

Singler B (2017b) The Indigo Children: New Age Experimentation
with Self and Science. Routledge, London

Singler B (forthcoming) Origin and the End: Artificial Intelligence,
Atheism and, Imaginaries of the Future of Religion. In: McLeish
T, Sollederer B, (eds), Title Oxford University Press, Oxford

Tamatea L (2008) If robots R-US, who am I: Online ‘Christian’
responses to artificial intelligence. Culture Relig 9(2):141—160

Tassinari A, Maccarone V (2020) “Riders on the Storm: Workplace
Solidarity among Gig Economy Couriers in Italy and the UK. J
Work Employ Soc 34(1):35-54

Tirosh-Samuelson H (2018) In Pursuit of Perfection: The Misguided
Transhumanist Vision. Theol Sci 16(2):200—222

Ward G, Hoelzl M (2008) The New Visibility of Religion: Studies in
Religion and Cultural Hermeneutics. Continuum, London

Venturebeat (2017) “An AI God Will Emerge by 2042 and Write Its
Own Bible. Will You Worship It?, available at https://venturebea
t.com/2017/10/02/an-ai-god-will-emerge-by-2042-and-write-its-
own-bible-will-you-worship-it/. Accessed Feb 24 2020

Virk R (2018) The Simulation Hypothesis: An MIT Computer Scientist
Shows Why AI, Quantum Physics, and Eastern Mystics Agree We
Are in a Video Game. Bayview Books, USA

Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Q) Springer
