Ethics and Information Technology (2020) 22:281-282
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-020-09562-y

EDITORIAL

-)

Check for
updates

Special issue on Responsible Robotics: Introduction

Aimee van Wynsberghe’ - Noel Sharkey”

Published online: 22 September 2020
© Springer Nature B.V. 2020

Robot applications in our personal and professional lives are
increasing at a rapid pace. Manufacturing robots are trans-
forming grocery store warehouses and online shopping dis-
tribution centers. Robotized dairy farms with robots to milk
cows, Clean stalls, and feed animals are re-conceptualizing
the practice of farming. Robot greeters in stores, banks and
hospitals, are re-inventing the ‘personal touch’ in marketing.
The responsible use of robots may have incredible benefits
for humanity, from monitoring and repairing climate change
destruction to the replacing of humans in dangerous, life
threatening tasks. Despite the success and efficiency that
robots promise to bring, however, there are societal and ethi-
cal issues that need to be addressed if robotics is to thrive in
academia and industry.

Some of the concerns in relation to the robotics and auto-
mation of today focus on the potential loss of jobs, the qual-
ity of jobs available, privacy concerns for data collected, and
human rights issues when targeting vulnerable demographics
as users/consumers of robots (e.g. children, elderly persons,
hospital patients), to name a few. To exacerbate these issues
consumers have little trust in many technology companies
when the dominant corporations continue to prove them-
selves unworthy of society’s trust by demonstrating a lack of
concern for privacy, coercion, and democracy or democratic
process. If robotics is truly to succeed in making our world a
better place, the public must be able to place their trust in the
designers, developers, implementers and regulators of robot
technologies. To do this, we must engage in the responsible
research and innovation of robot development processes as
well as the resulting products of such processes; what has
come to be known as responsible robotics.

b<} Aimee van Wynsberghe
aimeevanrobot @ protonmail.com

' Associate Professor of Ethics of AI and Robotics, Delft
University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands

Emeritus Professor of Robotics and Artificial Intelligence,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK

Responsible robotics is a term that has recently “come
into vogue’, yet the understanding of whatresponsible robot-
ics means is still in development. In recent years, research
courses, ! workshops,” and articles’ have been dedicated to
the topic. This area of research is aimed at shining a light on
how academia, industry and policy makers should anticipate
and account for possible negative side effects of new and
emerging robot applications. To do this it is necessary to
uncover the ethical issues at stake, explain how/why these
issues are problematic, and explore ways in which they can
be mitigated or prevented. Thus, responsible robotics has
an enormous task ahead to both raise awareness of possible
harms as well as assist in their prevention.

The co-editors of this special issue, Aimee van Wyns-
berghe and Noel Sharkey, are also the co-founders of the
Foundation for Responsible Robotics (FRR), a not-for-profit
organization established in the Netherlands in 2016,* dedi-
cated to bridging the policy gap between technical and ethi-
cal work happening in robotics. The FRR defines responsi-
ble robotics as: the responsible design, development, use,
implementation, and regulation of robotics in society. Before
moving forward there are two caveats of our definition we
wish to explain;

1. The word ‘robotics’ over ‘robot’ has been chosen to
indicate that it ought to cover the study of robots writ
large rather than the study on one application area, sec-
tor, or stage of development. While we agree that some
domains are more morally charged than others (health-
care versus factory for example) we assert that every
application and every domain will have novel ethical

' IDEA League summer school on responsible robotics, see https
://idealeague.org/blog-summer-school-responsible-robotics-and-ai/
(retrieved Sept 5, 2020).

> https://nias-lorentz.nl/pervious-nias/ and _https://responsiblerobo
tics.org/event/connected-robots-for-health-challenges-for-responsibl
e-robot-design-brocher-foundation-workshop/.

3 See Murphy, R., & Woods, D. D. (2009). Beyond Asimov: The
three laws of responsible robotics. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 24(4),
14—20.

* See responsiblerobotics.org (retrieved Sept 5, 2020).

Q) Springer
282

and societal issues to address. Moreover, by addressing
the study of robotics we wish to draw attention to the
idea that the overall practice of robotics (in academia
or industry) will create ethical concerns that warrant
immediate attention, such as: the impact of development
practices on (in)equality; the discarding of robots and
the environmental impact; the impact of robots on urban
planning; new educational programs in Universities; the
choice of robots as male/female, black/white, to name a
few.

2. We stand against the notion that a robot or robots can
be responsible for a mishap or other impactful issues.
Rather, responsibility and thus accountability for the
consequences of choices related to design, develop-
ment, implementation, and regulation must always land
at the feet of the humans involved. Without getting into
the metaphysical weeds here we wish to assert that an
artefact cannot be held responsible for the consequences
of its action. As scholars before, for example Johanna
Bryson and Deborah Johnson to name a few, have rightly
pointed out, robots are the product of our own making;
the materials used, the kind of intelligence they have,
and the way they will acquire this intelligence is all a
product of human decision making. Thus, the ‘respon-
sibility’ we are making reference to in our definition
of responsible robotics is that pertaining to the humans
involved in design, development, use, implementation,
and/or regulation.

To be sure, these are claims that the co-editors of this special
issue are putting on the table, open for further debate and
discussion. The intention is to facilitate open discussion as
constructive colleagues.

As seen in this collection of papers, the topic of respon-
sible robotics spans across application domains and stages
of development. There are a host of questions facing design-
ers and developers of robots, such as, the type of robotic
identity that is most responsible for a robot to bear (Arnold
and Scheutz, p. 271) or whether a robot can be trained to be
‘good’ (Sharkey, p. 197). And, there are a wealth of ques-
tions related to the responsible implementation of robotics,

Q) Springer

A. van Wynsberghe, N. Sharkey

such as: the ethics of mixed traffic as autonomous vehicles
enter our streets (Nyholm and Smits, p. 249) and the multi-
ple questions surrounding the use of robots in urban spaces,
aka urban robots, and how such robots can be designed
responsibly to uphold societal values (Nagenborg, p. 259).
To be sure, responsible robotics covers a wider area than
robot ethics, it also encompasses regulatory and policy mak-
ing concerns. In this issue, Liu and Zawieska (p. 235) dis-
cuss the notion of responsible robotics from a human rights
perspective, relevant for such policy making deliberations.
Finally, there are meta-ethical debates still to be had about
the ontological status of robots and if, how, and/or to what
extent responsibility can be extended to them (Gunkel, p.
221) and furthermore what responsibility we humans should
have towards the robots (Miller, p. 211).

Despite the appeal of the name one may still ponder the
question: what is responsible robotics? As we can already
see from this collection of articles, the answer evolves as
the technology changes and as more technological impacts
become apparent. The first step towards an answer, however,
must acknowledge that it is up to us—the humans behind the
robots—to be accountable for the responsible and ethical
development of this technological innovation.” Addressing
ethical issues in robotics means proactively taking stock of
the impact these innovations will have on societal values like
safety, security, privacy, and well-being. With robots coming
into our homes, cities, and factories, we can no longer wait
for bad things to happen in order to fix them. We must do
the hard task of getting it right the first time. Our families,
the environment, and our society can’t afford to be broken
by poorly designed and implemented robotics. This spe-
cial issue, and its contributions, are a step in the direction
towards getting it right, a step towards responsible robotics.

Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

> This is why the Foundation for Responsible Robotics has developed
and piloted a Quality Mark for Robotics and AI applications, for more
see https://responsiblerobotics.org/quality-mark/ (Retrieved Sept 7,
2020).
