 

robotics (mpPt|

Article

The Effects of Long-Term Child—Robot Interaction on
the Attention and the Engagement of Children

with Autism

Maria T. H. van Otterdijk 1, Manon W. P. de Korte 2”, Iris van den Berk-Smeekens 2°,
Jorien Hendrix 4, Martine van Dongen-Boomsma 77, Jenny C. den Boer 4, Jan K. Buitelaar 7°,
Tino Lourens °, Jeffrey C. Glennon 2, Wouter G. Staal 2°? and Emilia I. Barakova ’*©

1! Department of Industrial Design, University of Technology Eindhoven,

5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands;

m.t.h.v.otterdijk@tue.nl (M.T.H.v.O.); j.hendrix@student.tue.nl (J.H.)

Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands;
m.dekorte@karakter.com (M.W.P.d.K.); i.smeekens@karakter.com (I.v.d.B.-S.);
m.vandongen-boomsma@karakter.com (M.v.D.-B.); jan.buitelaar@radboudumce.nl (J.K.B.);
jeffrey.glennon@radboudumce.nl (J.C.G.); w.staal@karakter.com (W.G.5.)

3 Karakter Child and Adolescent Psychiatry University Centre, 6525 GC Nijmegen, The Netherlands
4 Karakter Child and Adolescent Psychiatric, 6710 BB Ede, The Netherlands; j.denboer@karakter.com
5° TiViPE, 5706 LD Helmond, The Netherlands; tino@tivipe.com
* — Correspondence: e.i.barakova@tue.nl
G check for
Received: 27 August 2020; Accepted: 24 September 2020; Published: 28 September 2020 updates

Abstract: Using a social robot has been proven to have multiple benefits for the training of children
with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). However, there is no clarity on the impact of the interaction
quality between a child with ASD and a robot on the effectiveness of the therapy. Previous research
showed that the use of a robot in Pivotal Response Treatment (PRT) could be an effective treatment
component in diminishing ASD-related symptoms. Further analyzing the data from a randomized
controlled trial of PRT treatment, we looked at the long-term effects of child—robot game interactions
to see whether the interaction quality changes over time. The attention and the engagement of six
children were measured through the observation of non-verbal behavior at three different stages in
the treatment that took 20 sessions per child. The gaze and arm/hand behavior of the participants
towards the robot, the game, and other present humans were observed. The analysis showed no
significant decrease in the attention and the engagement of the children towards the robot and
the game. However, the attention and engagement toward the parents of the children increased.
We conclude that the main result of sustained attention and engagement with the robot is due to the
personalization of the games to meet the specific needs of this user group. These specific needs are met
through inclusion of variability to the level of development and personal choice of each participating
child. We see the additional finding of increased attention towards the parents as especially positive
since the children are expected to improve in human—-human interaction as a result of this treatment.

Keywords: engagement; attention; children with ASD; pivotal response treatment; randomized
controlled trial (RCT); long-term robot intervention

1. Introduction

The use of social robots in the treatment of children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD)
has been a topic of research for years because it is one of the most promising applications for these

Robotics 2020, 9, 79; doi:10.3390/robotics9040079 www.mdpi.com/journal/robotics
Robotics 2020, 9, 79 2 of 15

robots [1,2]. Moreover, the therapies with robots may deliver improvements that are quite similar to or
even better than therapies provided by human therapists [3,4].

The main argument for the use of robots in behavioral therapies for children with ASD is the
ability of these robots to stimulate engagement, and thus motivate children to take part in therapy
sessions, as reported in [1,5]. Additionally, the children with ASD would eagerly focus their attention
on the given task, which contributes to the effectiveness of the treatment for these children [1,5,6].
However, most research on engagement and attention in interactions with robots reports results of
interactions from single sessions to up to eight sessions [5,7]. We consider these amounts of interactions
with the robot as short interactions since the treatment provided by human trainers, such as Applied
Behavioral Analysis (ABA) based Pivotal Response Treatment, (PRT) can take much longer.

Several studies have investigated whether the attention and the engagement in long-term
child—robot interaction are sustained [8,9]. Both studies [8,9] found a decrease in attention or
engagement over time. Another research proposed strategies to prolong the engagement of children
with ASD by conducting therapies through games and developing game goals that could be achieved
only through several follow-up interactions [9]. In this research, the children had to do a different
task each time, but did not have a choice for the game, and were not personalized to the individual
child. Yet another study personalizes the interaction by adapting the robot behavior to the child’s
emotional state and making the robot remember the names and performance of the children on tasks [9],
i.e., continuous adaptation. Differently, in the current study the focus was on the personalization and
appropriateness of the games between a robot and children with ASD. The designed game interactions
followed the individual development of each child and involved the therapy-specific PRT motivational
techniques, such as respecting the child’s choice for a game, providing a clear opportunity for a child
to respond, personalizing the scenario by including learning opportunities for both maintained (easy)
and new (difficult) tasks for each child, and providing direct and natural reinforcement to the child,
which is further elaborated in [10].

The current study is a part of a clinical study with 73 children with ASD in a three-armed
Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT) in which Pivotal Response Treatment (PRT) (N25) and robot-assisted
PRT (PRT+ robot) (N25) were compared with treatment as usual (N23) with children between the
ages of three and eight over 6 months. The main targeted areas within this study were the social
development of the children before the treatment, at twenty weeks onset of the therapy, and after
thirty weeks (follow-up) of the treatment [4]. A special effort was invested in the design of the games
to comply with the individual development of each child and to involve the therapy-specific PRT
motivational techniques [10]. The main experiment, reported in [4,11] found that children, who were
in the robot-assisted PRT group outperformed the other two groups in terms of social responsiveness
as observed by a blinded psychiatrist. The collected data provided the opportunity to look into the
child—-robot interactions throughout 20 sessions, conducted over six months. Specifically, we analyzed
the change in the attention and the engagement of these children over time. Therefore, the analysis
presented in this paper aims to determine whether the interest of the children in the robot condition
decreases over time, and not to determine the impact of the robot on children’s behavior which was
already established following clinically validated measurement instruments [11].

We hypothesize that there will be a decrease in both the attention and the engagement of the child
during interactions with the robot throughout the therapy. Even though a robot has the potential to
capture the attention and the engagement of a child with ASD [1], we expect that a novelty effect is
present, i.e., the initial increase in interest when the new technology is introduced, and will fade away
after some time [12]. We base this hypothesis on previous research that suggests that there is a decrease
in attention [12] and engagement [8] in child—robot interactions over time.

The outcomes of this research are expected to provide guidelines for the further improvement of
robot-assisted therapy for children with ASD. Particularly, how robots can be used in long-term
interactions without becoming boring to the children and requiring an unrealistic amount of
content creation.
Robotics 2020, 9, 79 3 of 15

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides brief background information on autism
and treatment and defines attention and engagement. The methodology will be discussed in Section 3.
This section involves details about the experimental design and the used observation scheme. Section 4
will show the results of the experiments. In conclusion, Section 5 will discuss the findings of the work,
followed by the conclusion from the conducted research.

2. Background

2.1. ASD and Pivotal Response Treatment

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder that is characterized by
deficits in social communication and interaction, and by restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior,
interests, or activities and sensory abnormalities. These deficits can affect the person’s ability to
function properly at school, work, and other areas of life [13] and can result in the avoidance of
social interaction [14-16]. Typical behaviors of children with ASD include little or inappropriate eye
contact, no social smiling, limited facial expressions, or no gestures that enhance communication [16].
Therapy can help individuals with ASD improve their social interaction skills, communication,
movement and acting, flexibility in thinking, and information filtering [16-18]. The interventions are
most effective when they start at an early age [1,18].

A promising behavioral intervention for children with ASD is pivotal response treatment (PRT).
PRT is an evidence-based treatment approach [19], which focuses on the social development of
the child by training key (pivotal) areas These key areas are motivation, response to multiple cues,
self-management, and the initiation of social interaction. Targeting these key areas may also result
in widespread collateral gains in other domains of functioning [19,20]. The PRT tries to stimulate
learning that occurs in the natural environment of the child—for instance, at home or school. Therefore,
parental involvement in the training is important. Key activities for a therapist and parent are: (1) to
follow the interest of the child, (2) to capture the attention of the child, (3) to create opportunities
for learning and, (4) to use suitable prompts and reward the child with natural reinforcements [20].
Natural reinforcements are for example, providing a child with a ball when the child requests it.
In this form of therapy, games are often used to evoke opportunities for learning for the child [20].
Play-based interventions, such as games, are a good way to train children with ASD as they target
multiple domains of training, therefore this approach is better aligned with the natural development of
a child [6]. Additionally, these techniques are used as they motivate the participation of a child in the
therapy. It also enhances their effort to attempt the target behavior and it teaches the child that their
behavior has consequences [21].

2.2. Attention

Attention is defined as the process in which a person focuses on a task or activity, which implies
that there is a selection of what an individual can focus on [22]. Children with ASD often have
problems with their attention spans [10,22]. For instance, they may have a deficit in shifting their
attention between a person and an object [22-24]. Another typical problem by persons with ASD
is that they can only focus on a single item that they are very interested in. This is referred to as
hyper-focus [25]. Attention can be measured in different ways, such as through observation and
psychological tests [25-27]. Attention can be measured by studying the gaze and the facial expressions
of the individual [27], which is the most common feature for detecting attention [6,28]. A different
approach used for studying the attention is to look at the gestural cues (touching or pointing to an
object) of the individuals [26].

2.3. Engagement

Engagement can be defined in different ways: social, behavioral, affective and cognitive
engagement. For instance, social engagement is a collaborative activity between two individuals
Robotics 2020, 9, 79 4 of 15

displaying verbal and non-verbal behavior [29]. Behavioral engagement concerns the involvement in a
task, affective engagement concerns the willingness to perform a task, and cognitive engagement relates
to the eagerness of learning new skills [5]. We adopt a working definition proposed by Perugia et al. [30]
that was previously used in a human-robot interaction study: engagement is a psychological state
of well-being that creates enjoyment and active involvement, triggered by meaningful activities.
Many studies have measured engagement in the child—robot interaction of children with ASD during
short-term interactions. Major ways of measuring engagement in these studies are through self-report,
observation of verbal and non-verbal behavior, and questionnaires [29-31]. Applying self-report
measures (i.e., questionnaires) is not feasible for young children because they may lack reliable
self-reporting skills [32]. Measuring engagement through non-verbal cues combines observing gaze,
facial expressions, and gestures [8,17,25,27,29] and their emotional load [30].

3. Methodology

3.1. Participants

A total of twenty-five children took part in the robot-assisted PRT, as explained in more detail
in [11]. This group was part of a larger randomized clinical trial aiming to establish the effectiveness
of PRT for children with ASD. Inclusion criteria were: (1) a clinical diagnosis of ASD, (2) meeting
criteria for ASD based on DSM-IV, (3) aged 3-8 years, (4) a total intelligence quotient (TIQ) of above 70
measured using either the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC-III) [33], Wechsler Preschool
and Primary Scale of Intelligence (WPSSI-HI) [34] or Mullen Scales of Early Learning (MSEL) [35],
(5) ability to speak with one-word sentences at minimum, and (6) at least one of the parents speaks
Dutch to the child. Six out of these twenty-five children were selected for this analysis based on (7) the
availability of the recorded data at the test moments during the therapy (twelve out of twenty-five
children met this criterion) and, the (8) distribution of gender to be the same as in the distribution
among the original sample (original distribution was 20 boys and 4 girls). The selected participants for
this study were five boys and one girl with a mean age of 5.17 (SD = 1.47) and a mean TIQ of 94.20
(SD = 11.8).

3.2. Procedures

In the RCT, the participants’ parents received verbal and extensive written information on the
outline and aims of the study and both parents signed an informed consent form prior to inclusion.
Baseline measures were performed if these had not been used as part of the diagnostic procedure.
Thereafter, participants were randomly assigned to the robot-assisted PRT, PRI, or treatment as
usual by the principal investigator of the study who was not familiar with the participants. Before
each intervention, parents received psycho-education on ASD if they had not received such in the
past. This was conducted either individually or within a group. Robot-assisted PRT consisted of 20
sessions of therapy, once a week, by a certified PRT therapist trained up until level III for this treatment.
The study received ethical approval by the Dutch Research Ethical Committee (CMO Arnhem-Nijmegen,
NL50509.091.14) and all procedures were in accordance with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its
later amendments.

3.3. Setting

The study took place at Karakter, an academic center for child and adolescent psychiatry.
The robot-assisted PRT was provided in regular treatment rooms. The robot was placed on a
rectangular table and controlled by the therapist, as shown in Figure 1. All sessions were recorded
using a video camera that was placed in front of or beside the child. Parents were also involved in the
sessions, but not always visible in the videos due to the positioning of the camera.
Robotics 2020, 9, 79 5 of 15

 

Figure 1. (Left): The layout of the research setting, with the child sitting next to the parent and facing the
robot and the therapist. The blue and yellow lights depict different camera locations. (Right): Snapshot
of the actual interaction.

3.4, Design and Materials

3.4.1. Game Flow

The gameplay interactions of children with ASD during robot-assisted PRT lasted between 15 to
20 min per session. The NAO robot, a small humanoid robot distributed by SoftBank Robotics [36]
was used in this experiment, and it was controlled with TiViPE software [37] to ensure that the robot
behaviors could be programmed and fine-tuned by the researchers from Karakter Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry University Centre, and thus increase their clinical validity. Additionally, the TiViPE software
allows the therapist to provide real-time prompts for the targeted behavior using an interface that is
connected to the ongoing (preprogrammed) scenario.

The robot followed game-based interactive scenarios that used teleoperation in many instances
to redirect the interaction or give an answer to unexpected questions. In the games, different PRT
elements were incorporated: the child selecting the game, providing clear learning opportunities
for the child to respond to, interspersing skill maintenance tasks with new tasks, direct and natural
reinforcement, and the reinforcement of attempts. Most of these techniques are used to increase the
motivation of the child in the therapy, enhance their effort into showing target behavior, and couple
the child’s behavior to its consequences [21]. The child could choose different kinds of games: card
games, building with LEGO, or making a puzzle, with three variations of each game, and seven levels
of each variation. For the card games, the child could choose between different themed quartet-games
(sea animals, fairy-tale characters, and cards with Frog and Friends). The older children (aged 5 or
above) could choose between three different LEGO games (a plane, a car, or a house). Younger children
(aged three to five) had a choice between three different LEGO DUPLO buildings (a plane, ducks, or a
house). For the puzzle game, the child could select one of three puzzles (animals, a magnetic boat,
or trucks). The level of the game that was used in the therapy session was selected by the therapist
based on the child’s target behavior. These behaviors are assessed using two- or three-word sentences,
wh-questions (what? where? who? which?), multiple cues, asking for an object/activity, asking for
help, protesting, and (early) conversational skills.

3.4.2. The Robot Behavior

The behavior of the NAO robot consists of actions and speech that occur simultaneously. The robot
speech was used to: (1) communicate with the child about the game or other non-game-related subjects,
and (2) elicit targeted behavior of the child (e.g., by saying: “I know how to play this game” expecting
Robotics 2020, 9, 79 6 of 15

that the child will propose to play the game together), (3) reward the child after performing/attempting
the target behavior (e.g., when the child asks a question, the robot directly responds), (4) keep the child
focused on the tasks, and (5) prompt the child.

There were four different levels of prompting: the waiting prompt (waiting for the child to
respond), the open question prompts (e.g., “What could you ask me?”), the fill-in prompt (e.g.,: “you
can ask me: what is... ”), and the tell-prompt (e.g., “you can ask me: could you open the block?”).
Parts of the prompts were preprogrammed and could be adjusted by the therapist to match the target
behavior of the child, and the others were provided during the interaction.

The movements of the robot came simultaneously with the speech. These were both direct and
natural reinforcements that were used to reward the (attempted) use of the target behavior. The direct
reinforcements consisted of cheering by raising the arms in the air when the child did something good.
The natural reinforcements provided by the robot consisted of opening the box with pieces of the game
that the child needed to finish it.

3.4.3. Building the Coding Scheme

To analyze the attention and the engagement of the participants, we looked into different coding
schemes for attention and engagement, but could not find a scheme with a specific focus on attention
and engagement of young children with ASD with robots. We, therefore, needed to create a new
coding scheme. We started with a set of behaviors and modifiers from the engagement coding scheme
developed by Perugia et al. [30]. This coding scheme was selected because it was created for people
who (1) cannot self-report and (2) are sited on a table when interacting with games or robots. However,
the behavior of children with ASD and people with dementia may be very different so we needed to
develop a coding scheme for children with ASD interacting with a robot and a game. The new coding
scheme was developed in two phases: orientation and verification. During the orientation phase,
six videos were watched (three in the PRT session without the robot and three in the robot-assisted
PRT-sessions). Of these sessions, only the behavioral cues that were mentioned in the literature
(gaze, facial expression, and gesture) were noted and included [9,17,25,27,29]. A useful addition was
the valence (the affect) of the behavior as identified as an important modifier by [29]. During the
verification phase, the draft version of the coding scheme was evaluated in multiple discussions with
expert clinicians to refine and make the coding scheme specific for the participant group of children
with ASD.

After the alterations, the components of the coding scheme were more specifically defined.
The direction of behavior was determined by the object the child would look at or reach towards.
The affective component for the gaze was linked to the facial expression of the participant. The positive
facial expression denoted when the child was smiling and laughing. Negative facial expressions were
denoted when the facial expression was identified as confusion, sadness, fear, anger, or boredom.
The affective component for the gestures was linked to the specific behaviors that are interpreted
positively in the behavior of a child with ASD. A positive gesture would be sharing game items with
the parent or therapist, handshaking while playing, and asking to share something while pointing
at it or reaching out, e.g., asking the parent to help them while reaching out to a bag with game
components. If the same behavior occurred outside of play, this would be regarded as a neutral
behavior. Negative gestures were categorized as throwing the game pieces, grabbing without asking,
or refusing to touch and play with the game. A summary of the final observation scheme that was
used for the analysis is shown in Table 1.
Robotics 2020, 9, 79 7 of 15

Table 1. The coding scheme for engagement and attention of children with Autism Spectrum Disorder
(ASD) in playful interactions with a robot and human caregivers. For coding the affective behaviors see
the text of Section 3.4.3.

Child’s Behavior Direction of Behavior Affect

 

Gaze towards the robot
Gaze towards the game
Gaze towards the parent
Gaze towards the therapist
Non-directed gaze
No gaze visible

Positive facial expression
Neutral facial expression
Negative facial expression

Gaze behavior

Arm/hand towards the robot
Arm/hand towards the game
Arm/hand towards the parent
Arm/hand towards the therapist
Non-directed arm/hand movement
No Arm/hand movement

Positive gesture
Neutral gesture
Negative gesture

Arm/hand behavior

3.4.4. Video Material

The video material depicted the game-mediated interactions between a child and an NAO robot
in the presence of a therapist and a parent. The starting point of the observation was the moment when
the robot greeted the child by saying “hello” and invited the child to shake its hand. The endpoint of
the observation was the moment when the robot said goodbye to the child and invited the child to
shake its hand again. When no handshake occurred at the end of the interaction, the endpoint of the
observation was determined by the moment the robot was switched off by the child or the therapist.
The analyzed videos were: early sessions (sessions 2 and 4), middle sessions (sessions 10 and 11), and
sessions at the end of the treatment (sessions 19 and 20). Session 2 and 4 were taken as the starting
point since sessions 1 and 3 were without the robot-assisted element. As explained in [38], the first
session, the PRT therapist observes the parent and child interacting. In session 2, the robot interacts
with the child. In the 3rd session, the parents were asked how they think about implementing PRT
principles and the PRT therapist informs the parents about her observations. Within sessions 4, 5, 7, 8,
10, 11, 13, 14, 16, 17 and 19, 20 the robot training takes place.

3.5. Data Analysis

The video material was scored using the coding scheme presented in Table 1. To score the video
material the software of Observer XT 14.2 was used. To analyze the statistical data SPSS version 20.0
was used. The dependent variables were calculated in the following way.

The duration of attention is the percentage of time that the child interacts with the robot during
the play session. The components of the observation scheme that were selected as measures for the
attention of the child in interaction with the robot are: gaze towards the robot, gaze towards the game,
reaching out towards the robot, and reaching out towards the game. Elements of both gaze and reach
were considered to be equal parts of the behavior. These components of the observation scheme
were selected because the child is in gameplay interaction with the robot. The measure of attention is
comprised of the sum of the percentages of gaze and arm/hand behavior regarding the robot and game
divided into 2.

The duration of engagement is the percentage of time that the child interacts with the robot during
the play session in therapy with positive affective expressions or gestures. The components of the
observation scheme selected as measures for engagement of the child in interaction with the robot are:
gaze towards the robot with a positive facial expression, gaze towards the game with positive facial
expression, reaching towards the robot with positive gestures, and reaching towards the game with
positive gestures.
Robotics 2020, 9, 79 8 of 15

The percentages of the independent variables were calculated per session. To establish the
percentage at different moments in the therapy, an average of sessions 2 and 4, 10 and 11 and 19 and 20,
was taken, which would represent the attention and the engagement at the start, middle, and end of
the therapy. A one-way repeated-measure ANOVA was computed to see whether the attention and/or
engagement towards the robot would significantly differ between the stages of treatment within the
subject. A post hoc analysis test using the Bonferroni correction was made to compare the different
periods of time. In the final step of the statistical analysis, we looked at the individual trends of the
individual components (game and robot) separately and their changes over time.

Additionally, a statistical analysis was conducted regarding the change in the attention and the
engagement towards the others in the therapy (parent and therapist). This was conducted in a similar
way for the dependent variables (attention and engagement towards the robot and the game).

4. Results

4.1. Attention towards the Robot

Children’s attention towards the robot was measured at three different stages of treatment.
Figure 2 displays the overall average change in the attention towards the robot (AR) and the attention
towards others (AO) (attention to both parent and therapist) at the different stages of treatment.
Normality checks were carried out on the residuals which were approximately normally distributed
with an Fingy of 3.05. Mauchly’s test indicated that the assumption of sphericity was not violated.
A repeated-measures ANOVA showed that the mean attention of the child towards the robot did
not significantly differ between the different stages of the treatment F (2, 10) = 0.19, p = 0.83, partial
1° = 0.04. This indicates that there is no change in attention to the robot over time.

Average attention of children in therapy

SS

40 | a=t== AR

30 == AO

Percentage of behavior
oolUlUmmllUlUCOOlllCUCOCO COTO OC

Start Middle End

Figure 2. The average change in the attention of all the children at different moments in the therapy.
AR = Attention to the Robot (robot + game), AO = Attention to the Others (parent+ therapist).
The percentages of behavior are the sum of gaze and arm/hand behavior involving robot and game
(AR) or gaze and arm/had behavior involving parent and the therapist (AO) divided into 2.

In follow-up analyses, we focused on the attention of the child towards the robot and attention
towards the game as two separate variables. These were measured at the same stages of treatment
as the original measurement. For both variables, the assumptions for conducting an ANOVA were
met. A repeated-measures ANOVA showed that the mean attention towards the robot only did not
significantly differ between the different stages of the treatment F (2, 10) = 3.58, p = 0.07, partial n? = 0.42.
This indicates that there is no change over time in the attention towards the robot as a stand-alone
element. The repeated-measures ANOVA showed that the mean attention towards only the game did
not significantly differ between the different stages of the treatment F (2, 10) = 0.38, p = 0.7, partial
1° = 0.07. This indicates that there is no change over time in the attention to the game on its own.
Robotics 2020, 9, 79 9 of 15

4.2. Engagement with the Robot

Children’s engagement with the robot was measured at three different stages of treatment. Figure 3
displays the overall average change of engagement with the robot (ER) and the engagement towards
others (EO) (engagement with both parent and therapist) at the different stages of treatment. Normality
checks were carried out on the residuals which were approximately normally distributed. Boxplots
and Shapiro—Wilk statistics indicated that the assumption was supported: Fingy was 1.37. Mauchly’s
test indicated that the assumption of sphericity was not violated. A repeated-measures ANOVA
showed that the mean engagement with the robot did not significantly differ between the time points
F(2, 10) = 0.34, p = 0.72, partial 7* = 0.06. This indicates no change in engagement with the robot
over time.

Average engagement of all children

0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00

a=mt== ER

=== EO

|

Percentage of behavior

Start Middle End

Figure 3. The average change in the engagement of all the children at different moments in the therapy.
ER = Engagement with the Robot (robot + game), EO = Engagement with Others (parent + therapist).
The percentages of behavior are the sum of gaze and arm/hand behavior with the positive affective
component involving robot and game (ER) or gaze and arm/hand behavior involving parent and the
therapist (EO) divided into 2.

In follow-up analyses, the focus was on the engagement of the participant with the robot and
engagement with the game as two separate variables. These were measured at the same stages of
treatment as the original measurement. For both variables, the assumptions for conducting an ANOVA
were met. A repeated-measures ANOVA showed that the mean engagement towards only the robot
did not significantly differ between the different stages of the treatment F (2, 10) = 0.84, p = 0.46,
partial n? = 0.14. This indicates that there is no change over time in the engagement with the robot as
a stand-alone element. A repeated-measures ANOVA showed that the mean engagement towards
only the game did not significantly differ between the different stages of the treatment F (2, 10) = 0.37,
p = 0.70, partial n* = 0.07. This indicates that there is no change over time in the engagement in the
game without the robot.

4.3, Attention towards Others in the Therapy

Additional analyses were conducted to investigate whether the attention towards others
(parents and therapist) had changed at three different stages of treatment. In Figure 4, the average
overall change in the attention towards the others (AO), the attention towards parents (AP), and the
attention towards the therapist (AT) are displayed at different stages in treatment. Normality checks
were carried out on the residuals which were approximately normally distributed. Boxplots and
Shapiro—Wilk statistics indicated that the assumption was supported: Fig, was 1.486. Mauchly’s test
indicated that the assumption of sphericity was not violated. A repeated-measures ANOVA showed
that the mean attention towards the others in the therapy significantly differed between the different
stages of the treatment F (2, 10) = 4.96, p = 0.03, partial n* = 0.5. Post hoc tests using the Bonferroni
Robotics 2020, 9, 79 10 of 15

correction revealed no significant changes at different moments measured in time. This indicates that
there is an increase in the attention of the child towards others in the therapy.

Average attention of all the children towards others

0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00

ome AT

=== AP

)\

Percentage of behavior

Start Middle End

Figure 4. Change of attention to others of all children at different moments in the therapy. AP = Attention
to the Parent and AT = Attention to the Therapist. The percentages of behavior are the sum of gaze and
arm/hand behavior involving parent (AP) or involving therapist (AT) divided into 2.

In follow-up analyses, we focused on the attention of the participant towards the parent and
the attention towards the therapist as two separate variables. These were measured at the same
measurement stages as the original measurement. For both variables, the assumptions for conducting
an ANOVA were met. A repeated-measures ANOVA showed that the mean attention towards the
only parents did not significantly differ between the different stages of the treatment F (2, 10) = 3.71,
p = 0.07, partial 7* = 0.43. Besides, the within-subjects contrasts showed a linear effect of time of
F (1, 5) = 27.86, p = 0.00, partial n? = 0.85. This indicates that there is a change over time in the
attention of the parent with a linear increase in time duration. A repeated-measures ANOVA with
a Huynh-Felt correction showed that the mean attention towards the therapist, without the parent,
did not significantly differ between the different stages of the treatment F (1.12, 5.57) = 0.60, p = 0.49,
partial n? = 0.11. This indicates that there is no change over time in the attention of the therapist.

4.4, Engagement with Others in the Therapy

Additional analyses were conducted to investigate if the engagement with others (parent and
therapist) changed at three different stages of treatment. Figure 5 shows the average overall change of
the engagement with others (EO), the engagement with the parent (EP), and the engagement with the
therapist (ET) displayed at the different stages of treatment. Normality checks were carried out on
the residuals which were approximately normally distributed. Boxplots and Shapiro—Wilk statistics
indicated that the assumption was supported: Fmax was 10.957. Mauchly’s test indicated that the
assumption of sphericity was not violated. A repeated-measures ANOVA showed that the mean
attention towards the others in the therapy significantly differed between the different stages of the
treatment F (2, 10) = 4.48, p = 0.04, partial 1° = 0.47. Moreover, the within-subjects contrasts showed a
linear effect of time of F (1, 5) = 9.11, p = 0.03, partial 1° = 0.65. Post hoc tests using the Bonferroni
correction revealed no significant decrease at the different moments measured in time. This indicates
that there is a change in engagement over time towards other humans with a linear increase over time.

In follow-up analyses, we focused on the engagement of the participant with the parent and the
engagement with the therapist as two separate variables. These were measured at the same stages
of the treatment as the original measurement. For both variables, the assumptions for conducting
an ANOVA are met. A repeated-measures ANOVA showed that the mean engagement with the
only parent did not significantly differ between the different stages of the treatment F (2, 6) = 6.65,
p = 0.03, partial n* = 0.43. Besides the within-subjects contrasts showing a linear effect of time of
F (1, 3) = 11.25, p = 0.04, partial n? = 0.79, post hoc tests using the Bonferroni correction revealed no
Robotics 2020, 9, 79 11 of 15

significant decrease at the different moments measured in time. This indicates that there is a change
over time in the engagement towards the parent with a linear increase over time. A repeated-measures
ANOVA showed that the mean engagement with only the therapist did not significantly differ between
the different stages of the treatment F (2, 10) = 1.68, p = 0.24, partial n* = 0.25. This indicates that there
is no change over time in the engagement with the therapist on its own.

Average engagement of all children to others

0.025
0.020

0.015
age [i

0.010 —s—ET

0.005

Percentage of behavior

0.000
Start Middle End

Figure 5. Change of engagement with others of all children at different moments in the therapy.
EP = Engagement with the Parent and ET = Engagement with the Therapist. The percentages of
behavior are the sum of gaze and arm/hand behavior with the positive affective component involving
parent (EP) or involving therapist (ET) divided into 2.

5. Discussion

This research aimed to find out whether the attention and engagement of children with ASD will
change with the time during longitudinal interactions of 20 sessions of robot-assisted therapy provided
within a period of 6 months. We hypothesized that there would be a decrease in the attention and
engagement of the child with the robot throughout the repeating sessions of therapy.

Our results rejected the hypothesis and showed that the children remained attentive to the game
and the robot throughout the overall treatment. These results contradict the findings reported in related
research by Coninx et al. [8] and Ahmad et al. [9], which found that typically developing children’s
attention and engagement with the robot will decrease over time. The most probable explanation is
the high variety and personalization of these games from the perspective of game design and from
the clinical perspective. In designing these games, we included multiple elements and objects that
especially appeal to the thinking patterns and the perception of children with ASD. Examples of
this are the choice of typical games that children with ASD play, uncovering the game opportunities
gradually by a robot (i.e., by further opening a sliding box with the missing puzzle piece), etc. From the
perspective of clinical practice, we adapted the difficulty of the game to the developmental level of each
child and used specific motivational techniques for the children with ASD. These techniques increase
the clearness of the interactions, which could have also contributed to the sustained engagement of
this particular user group. An alternative explanation for the constant level of attention might be the
possible hyper-focus of the children with ASD on interesting objects [26], since most children with
ASD are believed to enjoy the interaction with robots, such as NAO, that have simple facial features
and interact clearly through moving body parts and speech.

Other studies with typically developing children have used alternative methods for sustaining
engagement, focusing on adapting to the child’s emotional state and ensuring the robot remembers the
names and performance of the children on tasks [9]. These are complementary approaches that should
be used in the further development of the robot therapies. The same study found that game adaptation
did not result in sustaining long-term social engagement, which differs from our results. The long-term
effect of a game that continued during several sessions with children with ASD (who build different
parts of a LEGO city at each session) [10] also kept the engagement of these children high for 4-6 sessions
Robotics 2020, 9, 79 12 of 15

with a robot. The current study succeeded in keeping the engagement high by creating more game
variability and personalization for 20 therapy sessions.

There are several limitations to this study. The first limitation is the lack of visibility of children’s
behavior at some moments due to the fixed camera. To prevent inaccurate scoring, poorly visible
behaviors were scored as not visible or as no movement. The second limitation of the study was the
limited flexibility of the behavior of the robot: as the therapy progressed, it seemed to be too familiar
and not tuned to the progress of the children in the course of the therapy, since often the children
responded faster than the robot could respond. Most of the games were preprogrammed by the
researcher with a social science background using a specially created end-user interface of the TiViPE
robot controller [37,38]. This is an achievement by itself, but also restricts the interaction fluency since
the end-user interface allows less flexible interactions than the complete interface. A third limitation
is the small sample size. This makes it hard to draw firm conclusions on the effect of the robot on
children with ASD in general. The fourth limitation of this study is the scoring of the data by a single
observer. To increase the reliability of this research, the results should be confirmed by a second rater.
A major recommendation for the improvement of this line of research would be to further enhance
the variety of the games, since some children expressed their desire for new games that follow the
progress of the child.

6. Conclusions

We investigate the effects of long-term child—robot interaction on the attention and engagement of
children with ASD within PRT therapy as an established intervention for this target group. Our results
show that there is no change in the attention and engagement of the children towards the robot
over time. These results are determined by the design of the child—robot interaction in the current
study. This design is unique since it was mediated by personalized games and therapy-related game
interactions developed according to the best practices in the areas of interaction design and clinical
therapy. To list the design contributions, the robot and the child interacted through tangible games
such as puzzles, LEGO building, and card games, all known to be among the preferred games by
children with ASD. Most existing solutions use the robot as a conversation partner or use a screen
interface that hinders naturalistic interaction and makes the robot obsolete. From a clinical perspective,
the designed games were personalized in two ways: first to match the individual development of
each child and second, they involved therapy-specific motivational techniques that are known to
be useful in human caregiver-—child interactions. These techniques are asking the child to choose a
game, providing a clear opportunity for a child to respond to prompts, personalizing the scenario by
including learning opportunities for both maintained (easy) and new (difficult) tasks for each child,
and providing direct and natural reinforcement to the child, as elaborated in [11].

A very important additional finding of the current study was an increase in attention and
engagement towards other humans present in the therapy room. This effect is strongest in the attention
and engagement with the parent. This could support a positive change in the social responsiveness of
the child towards the parent over time and improve the quality of everyday life of the child.

Author Contributions: M.T.H.v.O. participated in the design and coordination of the study, performed
measurements, interpretation of data and drafted the manuscript; M.W.P.d.K. participated in the coordination of
the study and helped to draft the manuscript; I.v.d.B.-S. participated in the design and coordination of the study,
interpretation of the data and draft of the manuscript; J.H. helped to draft the manuscript; M.v.D.-B., J.C.d.B.,
J.K.B., J.C.G., W.G.S., T.L., helped in the draft of the manuscript and designed the initial RCT experiment. E.1.B.
participated in the design and coordination of the study and helped draft the manuscript. All authors have read
and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This PicASSo project was funded by a ZonMW Grant (Program Translational Research, project
number 95103010).
Robotics 2020, 9, 79 13 of 15

Acknowledgments: We also thank Rachel Loop from the Technical University of Eindhoven who participated
in the development of the games and Melanie Swallow, who proofread a previous version of this text.
<m.d.swallow@tue.nl>. The authors thank all the children, parents, and teachers that participated in the
trial, as well as the health care professionals of Karakter for their time and commitment which made the
trial possible.

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References

1.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

Scassellati, B.; Admoni, H.; Matari¢, M. Robots for Use in Autism Research. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2012,
14, 275-294. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Huijnen, C.A.G,J.; Lexis, M.A.S.; Jansens, R.; De Witte, L.P. Mapping Robots to Therapy and Educational
Objectives for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 2016, 46, 2100-2114.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

Huskens, B.; Verschuur, R.; Gillesen, J.; Didden, R.; Barakova, E.I. Promoting question-asking in school-aged
children with autism spectrum disorders: Effectiveness of a robot intervention compared to a human-trainer
intervention. Dev. Neurorehabilit. 2013, 16, 345-356. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

De Korte, M.W.; van den Berk-Smeekens, I; van Dongen-Boomsma, M.; Oosterling, I.J.; Den Boer, J.C.;
Barakova, E.I.; Lourens, T.; Buitelaar, J.K.; Glennon, J.C.; Staal, W.G. Self-initiations in young children with
autism during Pivotal Response Treatment with and without robot assistance. Autism 2020, 1362361320935006.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

Rudovic, O.; Lee, J.; Mascarell-Maricic, L.; Schuller, B.W.; Picard, R.W. Measuring Engagement in
Robot-Assisted Autism Therapy: A Cross-Cultural Study. Front. Robot. AI 2017, 4, 36. [CrossRef]
McDuffie, A.; Lieberman, R.G.; Yoder, P.J. Object interest in autism spectrum disorder: A treatment
comparison. Autism 2011, 16, 398-405. [CrossRef]

Tapus, A.; Peca, A.; Aly, A.; Pop, C.; Jisa, L.; Pintea, S.; Rusu, A.S.; David, O.A. Children with autism social
engagement in interaction with Nao, an imitative robot: A series of single case experiments. Interact. Stud.
2012, 13, 315-347. [CrossRef]

Coninx, A.; Baxter, P.; Oleari, E.; Bellini, S.; Bierman, B.; Henkemans, O.B.; Cafamero, L.; Cosi, P.; Enescu, V.;
Espinoza, R.R.; et al. Towards Long-Term Social Child-Robot Interaction: Using Multi-Activity Switching to
Engage Young Users. J. Hum. Robot Interact. 2015, 5, 32-67. [CrossRef]

Ahmad, M.I.; Mubin, O.; Orlando, J. Adaptive Social Robot for Sustaining Social Engagement during
Long-Term Children—Robot Interaction. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Interact. 2017, 33, 943-962. [CrossRef]
Barakova, E.I.; Bajracharya, P.; Willemsen, M.; Lourens, T.; Huskens, B. Long-term LEGO therapy with
humanoid robot for children with ASD. Expert Syst. 2014, 32, 698-709. [CrossRef]

Van den Berk-Smeekens, I.V.D.; Van Dongen-Boomsma, M.; De Korte, M.W.P.; Boer, J.C.D.; Oosterling, I.J.;
Peters-Scheffer, N.C.; Buitelaar, J.K.; Barakova, E.I.; Lourens, T.; Staal, W.G.; et al. Adherence and acceptability
of a robot-assisted Pivotal Response Treatment protocol for children with autism spectrum disorder. Sci. Rep.
2020, 10, 8110. [CrossRef]

Leite, I.; Martinho, C.; Paiva, A. Social Robots for Long-Term Interaction: A Survey. Int. J. Soc. Robot. 2013, 5,
291-308. [CrossRef]

Cautionary Statement for Forensic Use of DSM-5. In Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
5th ed.; American Psychiatric Association Publishing: Washington, DC, USA, 2014.

Marino, F.; Chila, P.; Sfrazzetto, S.T.; Carrozza, C.; Crimi, L.; Failla, C.; Busa, M.; Bernava, G.; Tartarisco, G.;
Vagni, D.; et al. Outcomes of a Robot-Assisted Social-Emotional Understanding Intervention for Young
Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 2019, 50, 1973-1987. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Happé, F. The Autistic Spectrum: A Guide for Parents and Professionals. By L. Wing. (Pp. 239) Constable:
London. 1999. Psychol. Med. 2000, 30, 231-239. [CrossRef]

Staal, W. Autismespectrumstoornissen. In Leerboek Ontwikkelingsstroonissen in de Levensloop: Een Integrale
Medische en Psychologische Visie; De Tijdstroom: Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2016; pp. 221-241.
Robotics 2020, 9, 79 14 of 15

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.
36.

Shamsuddin, S.; Yussof, H.; Ismail, L.; Hanapiah, F.A.; Mohamed, S.; Piah, H.A.; Zahari, N.I. Initial response
of autistic children in human-robot interaction therapy with humanoid robot NAO. In Proceedings of the
2012 IEEE 8th International Colloquium on Signal Processing and its Applications, Melaka, Malaysia, 23-25
March 2012; pp. 188-193.

Matson, J.L. Determining treatment outcome in early intervention programs for autism spectrum disorders:
A critical analysis of measurement issues in learning based interventions. Res. Dev. Disabil. 2007, 28,
207-218. [CrossRef]

Koegel, R.L.; Koegel, L.K.; McNerney, E.K. Pivotal Areas in Intervention for Autism. J. Clin. Child
Adolesc. Psychol. 2001, 30, 19-32. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Joustra, H.; van Lommel, S. Pivotal Response Treatment: Een gedragstherapeutische behandeling gericht
op motivatie en communicatie. In Applied Behavior Analysis Bij Kinderen en Adolescenten Met Autism; 2013;
Available online: https://metadata.isbn.nl/843679/applied-behavior-analysis-bij-kinderen-en-adolescenten-
met-autisme.html (accessed on 28 September 2020).

Koegel, L.K.; Koegel, R.L.; Harrower, J.K.; Carter, C.M. Pivotal Response Intervention I: Overview of
Approach. J. Assoc. Pers. Sev. Handicap. 1999, 24, 174-185. [CrossRef]

Zimbardo, P.G.; Johnson, R.L.; McCann, V. Psychologie een Inleiding, 7th ed.; Pearson Benelux: Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, 2013.

Egeth, H.; Kahneman, D. Attention and Effort. Am. J. Psychol. 1975, 85, 339. [CrossRef]

Noterdaeme, M.; Amorosa, H.; Mildenberger, K.; Sitter, S.; Minow, F. Evaluation of attention problems in
children with autism and children with a specific language disorder. Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 2001, 10,
58-66. [CrossRef]

Mayes, S.D.; Calhoun, S.L. Learning, Attention, Writing, and Processing Speed in Typical Children and
Children with ADHD, Autism, Anxiety, Depression, and Oppositional-Defiant Disorder. Child Neuropsychol.
2007, 13, 469-493. [CrossRef]

McDuffie, A.; Yoder, P.J.; Stone, W.L. Labels increase attention to novel objects in children with autism and
comprehension-matched children with typical development. Autism 2006, 10, 288-301. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Joseph, R.M.; Tager-Flusberg, H. An investigation of attention and affect in children with autism and Down
syndrome. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 1997, 27, 385-396. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Chevallier, C.; Parish-Morris, J.; McVey, A.; Rump, K.M.; Sasson, N.J.; Herrington, J.D.; Schultz, R.T.
Measuring social attention and motivation in autism spectrum disorder using eye-tracking: Stimulus type
matters. Autism Res. 2015, 8, 620-628. [CrossRef]

Sidner, C.L.; Dzikovska, M. Human-robot interaction: Engagement between humans and robots for hosting
activities. In Proceedings of the Fourth IEEE International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces ICMI-02,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 16 October 2002; pp. 123-128.

Perugia, G.; Van Berkel, R.; Diaz-Boladeras, M.; Catala-Mallofré, A.; Rauterberg, M.; Barakova, E.
Understanding Engagement in Dementia Through Behavior. The Ethographic and Laban-Inspired Coding
System of Engagement (ELICSE) and the Evidence-Based Model of Engagement-Related Behavior (EMODEB).
Front. Psychol. 2018, 9, 690. [CrossRef]

Anzalone, S.M.; Boucenna, S.; Ivaldi, S.; Chetouani, M. Evaluating the Engagement with Social Robots. Int. J.
Soc. Robot. 2015, 7, 465-478. [CrossRef]

Sidner, C.L.; Lee, C.; Kidd, C.D.; Lesh, N.; Rich, C. Explorations in engagement for humans and robots.
Artif. Intell. 2005, 166, 140-164. [CrossRef]

Kort, W.; Schittekatte, M.; Dekker, P.; Verhaeghe, P.; Compaan, E.; Bosmans, M.; Vermeir, G. Wechsler
intelligence scale for children (WISC-III NL). In Handleiding en Verantwoording, 3rd ed.; Harcourt Test
Publishers, Instituut voor Psychologen: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2005.

Hendriksen, J.; Hurks, P. WPPSI-III-NL Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence; Nederlandse
Bewerking; Pearson: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2009.

Mullen, E.M. Mullen Scales of Early Learning; American Guidance; Service Inc.: Circle Pines, MN, USA, 1995.
SoftBank Robotics. “NAO”. Available online: https://www.softbankrobotics.com/emea/en/nao (accessed on
6 May 2019).
Robotics 2020, 9, 79 15 of 15

37. Barakova, E.I.; Gillesen, J.; Huskens, B.; Lourens, T. End-user programming architecture facilitates the uptake
of robots in social therapies. Robot. Auton. Syst. 2013, 61, 704-713. [CrossRef]

38. Kim, M.-G.; Oosterling, I; Lourens, T.; Staal, W.; Buitelaar, J.; Glennon, J.; Smeekens, I.; Barakova, E.I.
Designing robot-assisted Pivotal Response Training in game activity for children with autism. In Proceedings
of the 2014 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), San Diego, CA, USA,
5-8 October 2014; pp. 1101-1106.

@) © 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
(cc) article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
BY

(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
