Environmental Modelling and Software 134 (2020) 104855

 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Environmental
Modelling & Software

  

Environmental Modelling and Software “a5

f

   

wi a 4.

Ze

ELSEVIE

R journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/envsoft

 

Check for

The Virtual River Game: Gaming using models to collaboratively explore updates
river management complexity

R.J. den Haan’, M.C. van der Voort*, F. Baart‘°, K.D. Berends”’“, M.C. van den Berg “©, M.
W. Straatsma‘, A.J.P. Geenen®, S.J.M.H. Hulscher”

* Department of Design, Production & Management, University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE, Enschede, the Netherlands

> Department of Marine and Fluvial Systems, Twente Water Centre, University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE, Enschede, the Netherlands
© Department of Software, Data and Innovation, Deltares, Boussinesqweg 1, 2629 HV, Delft, the Netherlands

4 Department of River Dynamics and Inland Navigation, Deltares, Boussinesqweg 1, 2629 HV, Delft, the Netherlands

© Department of Construction Management & Engineering, University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE, Enschede, the Netherlands

‘ Department of Physical Geography, Faculty of Geosciences, University of Utrecht, P.O. Box 80.115, 3508 TC, Utrecht, the Netherlands

 

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

 

 

Keywords:

Serious gaming

Social learning

Water management
Stakeholder participation
Participatory decision-making
Tangible interaction

Serious games are increasingly used as tools to facilitate stakeholder participation and stimulate social learning
in environmental management. We present the Virtual River Game that aims to support stakeholders in
collaboratively exploring the complexity of a changed river management paradigm in the Netherlands. The game
uses a novel, hybrid interface design that features a bidirectional coupling of a physical game board to computer
models. We ran five game sessions involving both domain experts and non-experts to assess the game’s value as a
participatory tool. The results show that the game was effective in enabling participants to collaboratively
experiment with various river interventions and in stimulating social learning. As a participatory tool, the game
appears to be valuable to introduce non-expert stakeholders to Dutch river management. We further discuss how
the hybrid interface combines qualities usually found in board and computer games that are beneficial in

engaging stakeholders and stimulating learning.

 

Software availability

Software name: Virtual River

Developers: Robert-Jan den Haan, Fedor Baart

Year first official release: 2020

Hardware requirements: PC, game table (drawings available) including
a webcam, touchscreen monitor and projector (a test version
can be run on just a PC)

System requirements: Windows or Linux, Delft3D FM Suite 2019.01
(1.5.1.41875)

Program language: Python

Program size: 1.7 GB

Availability: https://github.com/erjeetje/Virtual-River-prototype

License: GPL-3.0

Documentation: README in the Github repository

1. Introduction

Stakeholder involvement and participatory approaches are increas-
ingly important in environmental decision-making (Pahl-Wostl et al.,
2008; Reed, 2008; Voinov et al., 2016). A recent shift from sectoral
towards more integrated natural resources management has made
stakeholder participation essential to the pursuit of cross-disciplinary
objectives (Berkes, 2009; Pahl-Wostl, 2007; Reed, 2008). At the same
time, stakeholder participation is recognized as an effective way to
improve the quality of and acceptance in decision-making (Cundill and
Rodela, 2012; Reed, 2008; Voinov et al., 2016). One method that is
receiving increasing attention to facilitate stakeholder participation in
environmental management is serious gaming (Aubert et al., 2018;
Rusca et al., 2012; Voinov et al., 2016).

Serious games are generally referred to as games that have a primary
purpose other than mere entertainment (Michael and Chen, 2005; Susi
et al., 2007). In the context of environmental management and partic-
ipation, serious games are defined by Mayer (2009) as “experi(m)ent(i)

* Corresponding author. Department of Design, Production & Management, University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE, Enschede, the Netherlands.

E-mail address: r.j.denhaan@utwente.nl (R.J. den Haan).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2020.104855
Accepted 26 August 2020
Available online 5 September 2020

1364-8152/© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
R.J. den Haan et al.

al, rule-based, interactive environments, where players learn by taking
actions and by experiencing their effects through feedback mechanisms
that are deliberately built into and around the game”. To provide
feedback on actions, such serious games include a simplified represen-
tation of reality in terms of both the environmental system and its
stakeholders (Harteveld, 2011; Redpath et al., 2018; Rodela et al.,
2019). In this way, serious games enable stakeholders to explore envi-
ronmental challenges, interventions, and the effects of such in-
terventions in an environment in which it is safe to experiment.
Furthermore, serious games enable stakeholders to experience the
strategic interactions between stakeholders by explicitly including
interaction rules and assuming stakeholder roles in the game. Therefore,
serious games facilitate stakeholders’ learning about both the
physical-technical and the inherent socio-political complexities (Beke-
brede, 2010; De Caluwé et al., 2012; Geurts et al., 2007; Mayer, 2009).
The lessons learned while playing serious games can be both relevant
and transferable to real-world decision-making (Geurts et al., 2007;
Mayer, 2009).

One promising opportunity for serious games in the context of
stakeholder participation in environmental management is their use as
what Rodela et al. (2019) categorize as learning-based interventions. Such
games are developed to engage stakeholders in dialogue and activity in
order to contribute to what is commonly referred to as social learning:
changes in understanding through interaction in collaborative and
participatory processes that go beyond the individual (see e.g. Cundill
and Rodela, 2012; Muro and Jeffrey, 2008; Reed et al., 2010; Rodela,
2011). As learning-based interventions, games are therefore developed
under the assumptions that these: (1) provide stakeholders with
participatory environments that facilitate the stakeholder interactions
and collaborative experimentation that are essential to establish social
learning; and (2) contribute to individuals or groups experiencing a
change in understanding as a result of the game’s collaborative activity
(Ampatzidou et al., 2018; Flood et al., 2018; Medema et al., 2016). In the
literature, social learning is usually operationalized as: (1) cognitive
learning: acquiring new or restructuring existing knowledge; (2)
normative learning: changing viewpoints, values, or paradigms; and (3)
relational learning: increasing the understanding of the mind-set and
perspectives of other stakeholders as well as fostering the ability to
cooperate among stakeholders (Baird et al., 2014; Ensor and Harvey,
2015).

In the context of environmental management, there are various ex-
amples of serious games as learning-based interventions (see e.g. re-
views by Aubert et al., 2018; den Haan and van der Voort, 2018; Flood
et al., 2018 for games on water management, sustainability, and climate
change respectively). As one of a few recent examples (from a far longer
list), Craven et al. (2017) developed SimBasin to bring stakeholders
together with the aim of developing a shared understanding and sense of
urgency around the management of the Magdalena-Cauca river basin in
Colombia. They showed that the game was successful in creating an
open discussion space to bring stakeholders and scientists together. The
Sustainable Delta Game (Valkering et al., 2013; Van der Wal et al., 2016)
challenges stakeholders to develop collective strategies to manage a
fictional stretch of a Dutch river and aims to help them to learn about the
complex interactions between river management, climate change, and
changes in society. Results from twelve sessions showed that playing the
game led to the convergence of the players’ perspectives (Van der Wal
et al., 2016). Becu et al. (2017) developed LittoSim to enable social
learning among local authority managers on Oléron Island in France
about prevention measures to reduce the risk of coastal flooding. They
showed that LittoSim facilitated stakeholder experimentation with and
learning about risk prevention measures in relation to possible flood
events. van Hardeveld et al. (2019) developed the RE:PEAT game to
explore collaborative management strategies to help reduce soil subsi-
dence in the Netherlands. Results from ten sessions showed that RE:
PEAT improved cooperation among peatland stakeholders, increased
their understanding of the problems, and led them to possible strategies

Environmental Modelling and Software 134 (2020) 104855

for reducing soil subsidence.

Recent changes in Dutch river management provide a valuable case
study for designing and evaluating a serious game as a participatory
tool. Traditionally, river management has been dominated by dike
strengthening and was therefore within the field of hydraulic engi-
neering. A new management paradigm, involving spatial measures and
multifunctional design, brings in many other stakeholders that are
traditionally not usually involved with river management. The challenge
of collaboration between these diverse groups of stakeholders, in what is
still a rather technical field, demands a shared understanding of the
physical system. In this paper, we present the Virtual River Game, a
serious game to collaboratively explore river management complexity in
the Netherlands. The game was played in five sessions involving both
domain experts and non-experts to assess its value as a participatory
tool. It was guided by the research questions: (1) to what extent does the
game facilitate stakeholders collaboratively exploring and experiment-
ing with river interventions; and (2) to what extent does playing the
game lead to social learning outcomes?

The paper is structured as follows. The next section discusses the
game and particularly the fact that it facilitates stakeholders to apply
river interventions on a game board that has a bidirectional link to
computer models. Section 3 presents the assessment approach of the
game, including an overview of the sessions and the methods to collect
and analyze the data in order to address the research questions. Section
4 reports on the factual game output of the sessions, observations of the
in-game discussions, and the participants’ self-reported learning out-
comes. The paper ends with a discussion of the value of the game as a
participatory tool as well as on how the game’s hybrid interface com-
bines those qualities found in board and computer games that benefit
and support stakeholder participation and social learning processes.

2. Game description
2.1. Background and aim

To protect the deltaic floodplains from flooding, the traditional
approach in the Netherlands has been to build and reinforce dikes.
However, near-flood events in the 1990s shifted the approach of Dutch
river management towards applying so-called spatial measures that aim
to create more space for rivers to safely discharge water (Rijke et al.,
2012; Warner et al., 2012); for example, by digging side channels,
lowering floodplains, and moving back dikes (see e.g. Berends et al.,
2019; Straatsma et al., 2019; Van Stokkom et al., 2005). In addition to
lowering peak water levels, such spatial measures also aimed to restore
the local ecology (Fliervoet et al., 2013; Klijn et al., 2013; Straatsma
et al., 2017). This paradigm shift, while still retaining flood safety as its
primary focus, led to an increasingly more integrated river management
approach. As a result, it attracted new stakeholders to river management
(Verbrugge et al., 2019) and emphasized the importance of stakeholder
participation in decision-making (Edelenbos et al., 2017; Fliervoet et al.,
2013; Zevenbergen et al., 2015).

In the context of the new Dutch river management paradigm, we set
out to develop the Virtual River Game as a tool to increase and support
stakeholder participation. The game can beneficially be played at an
early stage of a project, as an icebreaker activity but that is disconnected
from the project’s actual decision-making. The game enables stake-
holders to collaboratively experiment with river interventions in order
to increase their understanding of Dutch river management — including
both the physical system and the effects and trade-offs of specific in-
terventions — and the perspectives and interests of other stakeholders in
relation to such interventions. During the game’s design process, we
found that some stakeholders — particularly those introduced to river
management as a result of the paradigm change — view the hydrody-
namic models central to Dutch river management decision-making as
mysterious black boxes (den Haan et al., 2018). Therefore, to support
stakeholder participation, we set out to develop the Virtual River Game
R.J. den Haan et al.

to enable stakeholders — regardless of background and expertise — to
work with a hydrodynamic model that is widely used in practice. To that
end, we developed a hybrid interface based on tangible interaction;
linking physical forms to digital information (Hornecker and Buur,
2006; Ishii, 2008). The interface features a bidirectional coupling of a
physical game board to a hydrodynamic, ecological, and cost model. An
impression of the Virtual River Game and its interface is shown in Fig. 1.
The Virtual River Game uses hexagonal tiles to represent a typical
stretch of a Dutch river that includes a main channel and floodplains and
dikes on both sides of the channel. The changing of the tiles on the game
board provides input to the models, while the models’ output is visu-
alized both on the game board through projection and in a game engine
shown on a touchscreen monitor. An overview of the game’s software
and hardware components is shown in Fig. 2. In the following sections,
we first introduce the models and their integration in the Virtual River
Game, followed by a description of the game itself.

2.2. Monodisciplinary models integrated in the game

2.2.1. Delft3D Flexible Mesh hydrodynamic model

To model water flow and water levels in the game area, we incor-
porated the Delft3D Flexible Mesh (FM) hydrodynamic model to
compute the hydrodynamic response to system change (Berends et al.,
2019; Kernkamp et al., 2011). We use a rectangular numerical grid of
cell size 20 m by 20 m. Initial bed levels and Chézy friction coefficients
are determined at the start of a game and are updated as the game
progresses. The boundary conditions are given by an upstream constant
discharge and a downstream constant water level. We use default
parameter settings (SI, Table 1). Water levels and flow velocities are the
model outputs of interest.

Touchscreen

- Game controls

- Virtual world of
physical board

- Model output

Projector

- Visualizations of
hydrodynamic
model output

“—
St ig
ES an,

Physical Board

* Hexagonal tiles
representing ele-
vation & land use

hy.

 

Fig. 1. An impression of the game table, including the physical board,
touchscreen monitor, projector, and webcam. The projection on the board in
this figure shows the hydraulic roughness of floodplain and channel locations,
visualized in a green to red color range to represent smooth to rough. The
touchscreen monitor has two functions: (1) as a controller for players to initiate
model updates and to switch visualizations; and (2) as an overview of the
current state in the game by providing a virtual world of the board as well as
information on the in-game performance. (For interpretation of the references
to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of
this article.)

Environmental Modelling and Software 134 (2020) 104855

2.2.2. BIOSAFE biodiversity model

To model the potential biodiversity of the game area, we integrated
the BIOSAFE model as developed by Lenders et al. (2001), De Nooij et al.
(2004), and Straatsma et al. (2017). The model calculates biodiversity
scores based on the potential occurrence of protected and endangered
species in each ecotope, the laws and regulations protecting the species,
and the surface area distribution of the main channel and floodplain
ecotopes between the dikes. Ecotopes are defined as “spatial landscape
units that are homogeneous as to vegetation structure, succession stage,
and the main abiotic factors that are relevant to plant growth” (Klijn and
de Haes, 1994). As input, the model needs the ecotopes and their surface
areas. As output, the model provides potential biodiversity scores for
seven taxonomic groups: mammals, birds, herpetofauna, fish, butter-
flies, dragonflies and damselflies, and higher plants.

2.2.3. VRCost cost model

To model the costs of interventions, we created a model in Python by
translating unit prices for costs for interventions in Dutch river man-
agement (Straatsma et al., 2019) to interventions in the game. Unit
prices relate to costs per volume, area, or length (hexagon cross section).
For example, a volume of soil may have to be excavated to construct a
side channel in the river’s floodplain. The model distinguishes four cost
categories: excavations, construction of hydraulic structures, land use
changes, and land acquisition. As input, the model needs the elevation
and land use change. As output, the model calculates the total costs for
changes on the board as well as the costs per type.

2.3. Interface design & model integration

For the Virtual River Game’s hybrid interface, we designed and built
a physical table (Fig. 1) that includes the game board plus an off-the-
shelf webcam, touchscreen monitor, and projector. The game board
consists of 143 hexagonal tiles representing a stretch of river. The
tabletop has an open aluminum mesh into which the tiles slot, leaving
the bottom side of each tile visible to the webcam. Each tile contains
information on terrain height and land use, which can be independently
varied. Table 1 shows the five elevation levels and twelve land use types
and their potential combinations. We chose the five elevation levels as a
representation of the varying elevations found in Dutch rivers. For the
land use types, we took inspiration from the classification of vegetation
types used by the Dutch Public Works Authority (Rijkswaterstaat, 2012).
Markers on the bottom of the tiles enable the conversion of the physical
board to a digital board, defining each tile’s elevation and land use in the
game’s software, based on a picture taken by the webcam. Throughout
the game, the system can be updated, triggering the software to process
the latest board state. In the following subsection, we explain the
additional processing steps in the software needed to link the board to
the models.

2.3.1. Model interface

The game software converts the digital board to a digital elevation
model (DEM) and a roughness distribution as input to Delft3D FM. The
DEM is created by an inverse distance interpolation (power of 2) of the
terrain height at the center of the three nearest tiles to a regular grid,
indexed to the computational grid used in Delft3D FM. The roughness
classes are based on a lookup table from land use to roughness class
(Table Al). Subsequently, the software calculates the hydraulic rough-
ness by retrieving the water levels of locations from Delft3D FM and
applying the vegetation friction model of Klopstra et al. (1996). The
software sets the elevation and roughness coefficients and also retrieves
water levels and flow velocity from Delft3D FM through the Basic Model
Interface (BMI) (Peckham et al., 2013), using the Python BMI (Baart,
2017).

For BIOSAFE, the software converts the digital board to an ecotope
distribution through a lookup table that links terrain height and land use
to ecotopes (Table Al). A subset of 15 ecotopes out of the 82 fluvial
R.J. den Haan et al.

ee

Physical board

 

Digital board
Land use model

CC Cr rr rr re rr re Ss

  

Game software

Model interface

Hydrodynamic
model

Ecological
model

Delft3D FM BIOSAFE

Indicator scores

Visualizations

Environmental Modelling and Software 134 (2020) 104855

 
  
     

Game engine

Tygron GeoDesign
Platform

    
  

Financial
model

VRCost

Software

mia ia a =

Fig. 2. Overview of the Virtual River Game’s hardware and software. The software components shaded in gray are plug-ins.

ecotopes defined in the Dutch ecotope classification (Van der Molen
et al., 2003) are included. Composite land use, such as ‘main channel
with a longitudinal training dam’, are split up into their pure ecotope
classes in order to calculate the surface areas of all ecotopes. The Python
version of BIOSAFE (Straatsma et al., 2017) is integrated in the game’s
software to enable sending of the ecotopes and retrieving the potential
biodiversity score for the taxonomic groups.

For VRCost, the software compares the previous and new board
states to detect changes in elevation and land use. Changes on the board
are sent directly to the model and the costs of changes, including their
breakdown into the four categories, are retrieved.

2.3.2. Model feedback

The Virtual River Game offers model output in two locations: on the
game board itself and on the touchscreen. On the physical game board,
the software visualizes the DEM, water flow patterns from Delft3D FM,
and hydraulic roughness coefficients by converting these into color-
maps, which are subsequently projected on the board. The flow pattern
is visualized as diffusive paint blobs that follow the flow lines. The hy-
drodynamic effects of changing tiles on the board are therefore visual-
ized based on the model’s output and projected on the same location as
which changes take place. Through these choices, we aimed at making
the hydrodynamic model more accessible and transparent by providing
a tangible, easy-to-use interface and by enabling players to link their
actions to the model’s output.

On the touchscreen, the game shows the Tygron Geodesign Platform,
a 3D spatial planning modeling tool that is also used as a virtual game
engine for those serious games that have a spatial development
component (Bekebrede et al., 2015; van Hardeveld et al., 2019; War-
merdam et al., 2006). The game interfaces with the Tygron game engine
through its API (Tygron, 2018). The inclusion of the engine serves two

purposes. First, the DEM and land use types of the digital board are
converted to a virtual game world that matches the game board. For
example, the engine shows trees for tiles on the game board that
represent the forest land use. Second, interactive panels in the engine
provide players with the output from and information about all three
models.

We deliberately developed the game in such a way that players are
able to fully control the interface without needing the game’s facilitator.
Players change tiles on the board, switch visualizations through the
Graphical User Interface (GUI) displayed on the touchscreen, and
inspect the virtual world as well as open panels in the game engine.
Updating the board state — which involves processing changes on the
board, running the models, and updating both the visualizations and
information in the Tygron engine — only takes between 15 and 30 s,
depending on the time needed for water levels in the hydrodynamic
model to stabilize. The update times are based on a dedicated, portable
computer utilizing an AMD Ryzen X3700 desktop processor to run the
game and models locally.

2.4. Virtual River Game

In the Virtual River Game, players are challenged to manage a 3500
m long deltaic stretch of river incorporating a navigable main channel
that has floodplains and dikes on both sides. The game scenario reflects a
high river discharge as result of which the floodplains are inundated.
Three teams, each consisting of one or two players, play the roles of
flood manager, nature manager, and financial manager. Collectively, the
players are given a budget and are tasked to improve the flood safety
status and ecological value of the area. Each team is given additional
objectives as well as special abilities to block implementations of in-
terventions based on real-world stakeholders, legislation, and European
R.J. den Haan et al.

Table 1

The five elevation levels and twelve land use types used in the Virtual River Game, including the feasible elevation level and land use combinations.

Reinforced
dike

Dike

Mixtype (30% forest/

70% natural
grassland)

Forest

Natural Reed and Shrubs

Production
meadow

Built-up

Side

Channel Channel with

Land use types

brushwood

grassland

environment

longitudinal training channel
dam

with groins

Elevation levels

O Main channel
1 Secondary

channel
2 Lower floodplain

3 Higher floodplain

(natural levee)

4 Dikes

Environmental Modelling and Software 134 (2020) 104855

Union development targets. The flood manager mirrors the Dutch Public
Works Authority, which is responsible for ensuring and maintaining
adequate flood safety levels. The flood manager can block interventions
if these decrease flood safety levels or if land use is changed to a type
leading to high hydraulic roughness (reed and brushwood, shrubs, for-
est, and mixtype), which reflects the legislative power of the Public
Works Authority. The nature manager represents larger nature man-
agement organizations such as the Dutch State Forestry Agency, which
own and manage a large percentage of the Dutch floodplains and aim to
develop their ecological value. The nature manager can block in-
terventions if those decrease the area’s ecological value. To reflect the
common view that nature organizations hold less power than for
example the Dutch Public Works Authority in real world decision-
making, this ability can only be used once during the game. The finan-
cial manager represents a combination of the Dutch national govern-
ment, which allocates budget for river projects, and regional
governments, which are the commissioners of river projects and
responsible for managing the floodplains as Natura 2000 areas under the
EU Birds and Habitats Directives. The financial manager can block in-
terventions if those would take more than half of the initial budget or if
these require expensive land acquisition (buildings and agricultural
land), which reflects the interest of governments to pursue cost-
effective, win-win solutions. If players are part of any of these or
similar organizations, they are assigned a role that is different from their
regular role to let them experience river management from another
point of view.

Each game consists of a maximum of four rounds. During each round,
players apply one of six interventions: side channel construction,
floodplain lowering (grading), floodplain smoothing (changing the
floodplain vegetation to lower roughness), replacement of groins
(alternatively termed ‘wing dikes’ or ‘spur dikes’) with longitudinal
training dams, dike relocation, or dike reinforcement. Players first
discuss and agree which intervention they wish to apply. They subse-
quently implement the chosen intervention by changing tiles on the
game board while following the intervention’s rules. During this
implementation phase, players can continually change tiles and collec-
tively evaluate the intervention’s effects before agreeing on a final
implementation.

2.4.1. In-game scoring

In the Virtual River Game, we included performance indicators on
flood safety, biodiversity, and budget. Therefore, interventions are
evaluated on hydrodynamics, ecology, and costs, as in the Delft3D FM,
BIOSAFE, and VRCost models. Each indicator has its own progress bar
across a 0-100% score range. Minimum (50%), good (65%), and
excellent (80%) scores are provided for both the flood safety and
biodiversity indicators. We determined these scores as a balance be-
tween the game’s representation of reality and its playability (see Har-
teveld, 2011) that: (1) reflects Dutch river management practice in terms
of performance; and (2) corresponds to the difficulty of attaining good
scores in the game. Players can click each indicator’s progress bar on the
touchscreen to see graphics on the effects of interventions on that in-
dicator. In addition, separate information panels are available to players
where they can see simplified scores after each tile change to anticipate
the effects of interventions.

The flood safety score is based on the water levels along the river axis
in comparison to the crest height of the dike at each tile location on the
board. The water levels can be at or above, just below, or well below the
dike’s crest height, corresponding to that location being considered
unsafe, moderately safe, and substantially safe, respectively. Unsafe,
moderately safe, and substantially safe locations each contribute to the
flood safety score as zero, half, and full score, respectively. Conse-
quently, the overall flood safety score is 0% when all dike locations are
considered unsafe and 100% when all dike locations are considered
substantially safe. Flood safety is visualized in the indicator panel as a
longitudinal profile of the stretch of river that includes initial and
R.J. den Haan et al.

current water levels and as a top view with each dike tile colored red,
yellow, or green representing unsafe, moderately safe, and substantially
safe, respectively.

The biodiversity score is based on the potential biodiversity, the sum
of the scores on the seven taxonomic groups, over the whole river reach.
This sum is converted to a percentage in the 0-100% range for
simplicity. We determined the 0% and 100% scores for biodiversity by
running a Monte Carlo simulation to find the board layouts that result in
the lowest and highest potential biodiversity scores respectively that can
be achieved in the game. In the indicator panel, the potential biodi-
versity of the taxonomic groups, the sum, and the corresponding score
are provided. Furthermore, a bar graph shows the scores on the seven
taxonomic groups for both the initial and the current game board. A
second bar graph shows the change for each taxonomic group expressed
as a percentage.

The budget score reflects the remaining budget that players have
available as a percentage of the initial budget that they received at the
start of a game. The initial budget is therefore equivalent to a 100%
score. Spending the whole budget results in a 0% score and spending
more than the budget results in a negative score. A graph shows the
budget spent per round as well as the remaining budget in the budget
indicator panel, expressed both in Euros and a percentage of the initial
budget. In a second graph, the breakdown of the costs incurred per
round is shown as stacked bars.

2.4.2. In-game objectives

Teams are scored on each indicator separately throughout the game.
As acollective objective, the players have to achieve the minimum score
(50%) for both flood safety and biodiversity in the four rounds while
(preferably) staying within the budget. Collectively, the teams may
decide not to play all rounds if they reach the collective objective before
the fourth round. Additionally, each team is given one main and two
secondary objectives. The teams receive the instruction that, in order to
win the game, they have to reach both the collective objective and their
role-specific main objective. The role-specific secondary objectives are
presented as bonus points that they can earn. The flood manager is given
the main objective to achieve a good flood safety score (65%). The
secondary objectives are to achieve an excellent flood safety score (80%)
and ending the game without any unsafe dike locations. The nature
manager has the main objective of achieving a the good biodiversity
score (65%) and the secondary objectives of achieving an excellent
biodiversity score (80%) and to end the game with five or more forest
locations within the floodplains. The budget manager is tasked to limit
spending to the collective budget. The secondary objectives are to ach-
ieve good scores for flood safety and biodiversity (65%). The collective
objective is known to all players. Each team is given its main and sec-
ondary objectives at the start of the game by blindly drawing one of four
role-specific objective cards. Players do not know that these four cards
all list the same main and secondary objectives for their team. Players
are not told whether or not to share their team’s objectives with other
players.

3. Virtual River Game evaluation

We developed the Virtual River Game to support stakeholder
participation in the new Dutch river management paradigm. In this
study, we set out to assess the potential of the game as a participatory
tool guided by the research questions: (1) to what extent does the game
facilitate stakeholders collaboratively exploring and experimenting with
river interventions; and (2) to what extent does playing the game lead to
social learning outcomes? The research questions address what Aubert
et al. (2019) refer to as the process-oriented (how are these outcomes
achieved) and variance-oriented (what outcomes are achieved) assess-
ment of serious games.

The first research question focused on the game itself to evaluate its
ability to engage stakeholders in dialogue and activity — a prerequisite to

Environmental Modelling and Software 134 (2020) 104855

stimulating social learning. Following the scope of the game and its
interface design, we were particularly interested in evaluating the extent
to which the game facilitates both domain experts and non-experts to
engage in collaborative experimentation with river interventions. We
considered the game to be successful as a participatory tool when par-
ticipants — regardless of their background and expertise — (1) developed
a shared understanding of the problem; (2) developed a collaborative
strategy to address that problem; (3) engaged in discussions on how
interventions affect indicators and role objectives; and (4) applied and
tested various implementations of interventions.

The second research question focused on evaluating to what extent
playing the game led to social learning by individual participants.
Following the game’s scope, we focused on learning outcomes related to
cognitive and relational learning (Baird et al., 2014; Ensor and Harvey,
2015). Cognitive learning outcomes that were assessed included gaining
an improved understanding of: (1) the functioning of the river system;
(2) the effects of interventions and their trade-offs; (3) how hydrody-
namic models work and are used in decision-making; and (4) the con-
flicts and opportunities for cooperation between the various stakeholder
roles. Relational learning outcomes that were assessed relate to gaining
an improved understanding of the mind-sets and perspectives of other
participants. We considered the game to be successful when both
domain experts and non-experts achieve cognitive or relational learning
outcomes or both. As experts bring their knowledge and experience to
the game, we expected that they would achieve fewer cognitive learning
outcomes than non-experts.

To address the research questions, we organized five sessions playing
the Virtual River Game. In the following subsection, we describe the
setup of the sessions and their participants. In subsection 3.2, we
describe the data collection methods and the data analysis used to
address both research questions.

3.1. Sessions and participants

The description of a session playing the Virtual River Game is pro-
vided in Box 1. We invited both domain experts (professionals working
in Dutch river management) and non-experts (participants without river
management expertise) to the sessions. None of the sessions were linked
to a real-world river project. This made it difficult to engage with non-
experts who are also real-world stakeholders in Dutch river manage-
ment. Therefore, we invited design researchers and game designers to
represent non-expert stakeholders. We organized two sessions that
included only expert participants and three sessions of experts and non-
experts (Table 2). Each session had between four and six participants in
a total of 26 participants. The length of each session, including the ex-
planations and debriefings, was around 3 h. The actual length of
gameplay ranged between 78 and 109 min. All sessions had the same
experienced facilitator and a trained observer. We prepared an initial
board (Fig. 3) as a scenario that we used in every session. The scenario
reflected a stretch of river with a hydrodynamic bottleneck formed by
narrow floodplains, higher floodplain terrain, and vegetation that causes
high hydraulic roughness, resulting in unsafe water levels upstream
from the bottleneck. After the second session, we changed one param-
eter of the scenario by lowering the initial budget by 30% to € 17.5
million because the initial budget was found to be too high. Although
reducing the budget between sessions was undesirable, we aimed to
stimulate more discussions that also addressed the cost-effectiveness of
interventions — one of the main criteria in real world decision-making.
We chose the 30% reduction as this aligned with the budget spent
during the first session.

3.2. Data collection and analysis
We applied a multi-method approach to collecting and analyzing

both quantitative and qualitative data. Our approach consisted of: (1) a
pre-game questionnaire; (2) in-game data logging; (3) in-game
R.J. den Haan et al. Environmental Modelling and Software 134 (2020) 104855

Box 1
Description of a game session

. The facilitator welcomes the participants and provides an overview
of the session.

. The participants fill in the pre-game questionnaire.

. The facilitator briefs the participants on the game. The facilitator
explains the scope of the game, the game indicators, and models
behind these, the collaborative objective, the rules, and how the
game interface works.

. The participants engage in a trial round, in which they select one
intervention and implement it by making changes on the board to
familiarize themselves with the game’s interface.

. After the trial round, the participants take a short break, during
which the facilitator resets the game system and rearranges the
board to the game scenario.

. Before starting the game, the facilitator assigns the participants to
their roles in the game and lets them draw their objective cards. The
facilitator explains the roles to all the participants, including their
abilities to block the implementation of interventions.

. The game starts, for a maximum of four game rounds. During each
round, the participants first discuss and decide which intervention
they want to apply using any and all information available to
them*. If no consensus is reached, participants vote on the
intervention to apply, with each role having one vote.

. As a second part of the round, participants implement the chosen
intervention. They discuss and make changes on the board based on
the intervention’s rules. For example, to relocate a dike,
participants move dike tiles further away from the main channel,
enlarging the floodplains, in such a way that all dike tiles on that
side of the river remain connected (i.e. no gaps are allowed).
Participants are able to continuously make changes on the board
and update the game system to inspect the intervention’s effects on
the indicators*. The participants can use their assigned role’s
abilities to block the intervention during this step.

. The participants end the round by finalizing the implementation of
the intervention. Preferably, the participants decide through
consensus that they are satisfied with the intervention’s
implementation*. If no consensus is reached, participants vote on
finalizing the implementation, with each role again having one
vote. No implementation may be finalized under a legitimate use of
an ability to block the intervention. Steps 7 to 9 are repeated until
the fourth round finishes or sooner if the participants are satisfied
with their results before reaching the fourth round.

10. Directly after finishing the game, participants fill in the post-game
questionnaire.

11. To conclude the session, the participants collectively reflect on the
game activity in the debriefing, moderated by the facilitator.

* During all stages of a game round, the participants themselves are in charge of deciding,

testing and implementing interventions. Only if participants seem stuck in any phase of

the round does the facilitator pose a question or push for a decision. Otherwise, the

facilitator stays mostly passive apart from making sure that the game rules are followed.

The facilitator is available at all times to answer participants’ questions, but does not

advise or tell players what to do or not do.

 

observations; (4) a post-game questionnaire; and (5) a post-game
debriefing. Before starting the game, the participants filled out a short
questionnaire stating their age, expertise, experience related to river
management, and experience with serious gaming, all so as to separate
expert from non-expert participants (SI, Table 2). During the game, the
participants’ decisions and performance for each update were stored in a
log file. In addition, we observed the participants’ discussions during the
game. We used an observation recording form to document a timeline of
each session by linking discussions to the three indicators as well as to
intermediate and final decisions taken in the game (SI, Table 3). We used
this timeline to analyze each session’s outcomes (e.g. interventions
applied, final layout, score progression) and processes (e.g. discussions,

consideration of options, contributions of participants) in order to
address the first research question. Directly after playing the game, the
participants completed a second questionnaire that focused on their
overall impressions of the game and the insights gained by playing the
game (SI, Table 4). In closed questions, the participants were asked to
self-report their experiences by rating their agreement with statements
on a 5-point Likert scale that ranged from ‘strongly agree’ to ‘strongly
disagree’: a common approach in game studies (Bekebrede et al., 2018;
Keijser et al., 2018; Mayer et al., 2013). In one open question, the par-
ticipants were asked to list a maximum of three main insights obtained
by playing the game. We categorized the open question answers in
relation to cognitive and relational learning to determine what experts
R.J. den Haan et al.

Table 2
Overview of the sessions and participants.
Session Type of Number of Description of Length of
session participants participant the game
(Niotal = 26) backgrounds (minutes)
1 Experts 5 Flood safety specialists, 91
river management
advisors
2 Mixed 5 River management 109
advisor, design
researchers
3 Experts 6 Flood safety specialists, 84
project managers,
ecologists
4 Mixed 4 Water management 102
researchers, design
researchers
5 Mixed 6 River management 78°

advisors, public policy
researchers, serious
games designers

* The reported length of the game in this session includes a correction for
internet issues that resulted in a loss of 20 min to play the game.

and non-experts identify as the main insights from playing the game. We
used the data from the completed questionnaires to address the second
research question. One non-expert participant did not complete the
post-game questionnaire and was therefore excluded from the results
(Ntotal = 25 for the questionnaire). To conclude each session, we con-
ducted a debriefing to collectively reflect on the game activity. The
debriefing was set up along the lines proposed by Kriz (2010): six phases
to structurally reflect on the game activity. To confirm that the discus-
sions and considerations in the game reflect those encountered in
practice, we expanded the third phase of the debriefing — which includes
reflecting on the game’s external validity (Van den Hoogen et al., 2014)
— in the two expert sessions. Following informed consent, we recorded
the debriefings to transcribe these for later analysis. We used the
debriefing data to further interpret the analyses to help address both
research questions. In addition, we compared the data to address the two
research questions with each other to strive for data triangulation.

4. Results
4.1. Collaborative experimentation with river interventions (RQ1)

The first research question was to what extent the game facilitates
stakeholders to collaboratively exploring and experimenting with river
interventions. Here, we present the chosen interventions and indicator
scores as the factual game output, as well as the observations of the in-
game discussions about and experimentations with those interventions.

4.1.1. Interventions and scores

The choice and implementations of interventions during the game
sessions showed that good scores (between 65% and 79%) for both flood
safety and biodiversity can be achieved in several ways (Fig. 4). For

Game scenario

Elevation levels
Main channel level
Side channel level
Floodplain level
Natural levee level
Dike level

Initial elevation

 

Environmental Modelling and Software 134 (2020) 104855

flood safety, only the participants in the fourth session (71%) did not
achieve an excellent score (80% or higher). Excellent scores for biodi-
versity were not achieved in any session. In all sessions, the participants
first focused on increasing the flood safety scores, generally spending
most of the budget during the first two rounds.

Increasing the biodiversity scores became the focus during the later
rounds. Participants in the third and fifth sessions used their remaining
budget to achieve good biodiversity scores (between 65% and 79%), but
only after achieving satisfactory flood safety scores. During all sessions,
participants applied the floodplain smoothing intervention to increase
their biodiversity scores while at times also optimizing their flood safety
scores. During the second and third sessions, participants also chose the
side channel construction and replaced groins with longitudinal training
dams to increase their biodiversity scores.

4.1.2. Strategies and discussions

At the start of each session, participants explored the game scenario
by changing the board visualizations, inspecting the information on the
touchscreen, and linking the information from these two sources. Initial
discussions focused on establishing a shared understanding of the flood
safety bottleneck and on how flood safety could be improved. During the
mixed sessions, expert participants were observed taking prominent
roles in these early discussions. These experts supplemented the in-game
information by explaining what they saw as problems, for example that
the bottleneck caused higher water levels upstream, and suggested what
could be done to improve the indicator scores. Non-experts initially
followed their lead but then started to make their own suggestions as the
games progressed. During the sessions that included only professionals,
experts who regularly work with hydrodynamic models were similarly
observed to take more prominent roles at the start of the game. The
discussions during these sessions moved more quickly from identifying
the bottleneck to possible interventions than in the mixed sessions.
During these discussions, flood safety specialists were observed to start
the games as if they were in their real-world roles, even though they had
not been assigned to the flood safety manager team. Game discussions
during the early rounds did include how tackling the flood safety
bottleneck could simultaneously improve biodiversity without the costs
of interventions rising unacceptably. However, no change in general
direction of these discussions was observed as a result of lowering the
budget after the second session.

After establishing a shared understanding of the problem, the dis-
cussions during all sessions focused on deciding which intervention to
implement in the first round. In no session did the participants develop a
collaborative strategy at the start of the game. During the sessions, the
participants were observed to plan ahead by discussing how the inter-
vention they were implementing could be made more effective by
applying a different intervention in the next round. Experts continued to
supplement the in-game information, for example by explaining that
changing land use to a type with high hydraulic roughness to increase
biodiversity (e.g. to a forest) is best done at locations where there is a
low flow velocity (e.g. next to a dike) to limit its effect on flood safety.
Discussions during the later stages of the game featured more bargaining
between the teams, each seeking to pursue their main and secondary

Land uses
M8 Main channel, groynes Reed & brushwood
Mi Main channel, LTDs /" Natural grassland
Side channel Meadow
' Vegetation mixtype Building
Ml Forest Mi Dike
LE

Shrubs

 

Initial land use

Fig. 3. Initial board layout that was used as a starting situation in all sessions.
R.J. den Haan et al.

1. Scores and interventions during game
round1 round2  round3_ round 4
100%
Excellent: 80% weeeee eee e cece ence neneseeeeeseeeeessesesesusssssespeerenes
Good: 65% wae war war nae sae FT TL OB%

Minimum: 50%

Session 1

Professionals
indicator

score

°
x

100%

Excellent: 80%
Good: 65%
Minimum: 50%

Session 2

Mixed group
indicator

score

°
x

100%

Excellent: 80%
Good: 65%
Minimum: 50%

eeuncetecccccccccccccccoucscescccscetis TTT PTET ccces ss 68%

Session 3
Professionals

indicator
score

Excellent: 80%
Good: 65%

Ys
£o Minimum: 50%
Qo
Ho Lo
ve 59
n= o&
= 0%
100%
Excellent: 80%
Na Good: 65%
¢c 3 Minimum: 50%
oO
Zo
—
Ho Zo
v= So
n= ou
£ 0%

Applied interventions

2. End of game
elevation

Environmental Modelling and Software 134 (2020) 104855

3. End of game
land use

   
 
   
  

1. Score indicators

=—— Flood safety
== Biodiversity
—- Budget

. Interventions

Side channel
construction

Floodplain lowering

Floodplain smoothing

Replacing groynes
with LTDs

Dike relocation

Dike reinforcement

 

 

 

Elevation levels

  
   
   

2:
Mm Main channel level
Mm Side channel level
@am Floodplain level
Natural levee level
/ Dike level

   

3. Land uses

Main channel, groynes
Main channel, LTDs
Side channel
Vegetation mixtype
Forest

Shrubs

Reed & brushwood
Natural grassland
Meadow

Building

Dike

 

 

Fig. 4. Overview of the game sessions, with each row showing the result of one session. The first column shows the interventions applied during the four game
rounds and the resulting progression of indicator scores, with the final indicator scores listed to the right of the graphs. The number shown below each intervention
icon indicates the number of implementations that participants tested during the respective round. The budget indicator scores for the first two sessions are adjusted
to match the lowered budget. The second column shows the final board layout for the bed elevation and the third column shows the final layout for the land use.

objectives. For example, discussions during the third and fifth sessions
included teams agreeing on the choice of intervention in one round only
if the other teams agreed beforehand on the intervention to be made in
the subsequent round. During these bargaining discussions, participants
started to share their team objectives. Only in the fifth session did the
participants share their team objectives at the start of the game to
establish their own common objectives, guided mostly by one expert
participant who advocated forgetting about the politics. No notable
differences in late-game discussions were observed between the expert
and mixed sessions. Non-experts were as active in proposing imple-
mentations of interventions as experts were and their suggestions were
also applied on the board. In the three sessions after reducing the
budget, the costs of interventions were emphasized more during the late-
game discussions, in particular by the budget manager teams.

During the debriefings, participants confirmed that they did not have
a collective strategy for the game, but that it felt natural to them to plan
ahead while testing implementations of interventions. Additionally,
participants in the second, third, and fifth sessions explicitly indicated
that it seemed logical to them to start with the most drastic intervention
and to subsequently optimize from there. Before asking about the
connection of the game activity to reality during the third session
(expert session), the following discussion took place:

Expert A: “... and that [the game] more or less reflects how things
work in reality. Iam working together with Expert D on an area, in
which we have the same type of discussions.”

Expert B: “I really liked that you could quickly update and inspect the
results. Like, how does this work out? How far are we now? That is
very useful. The risk is that you start micro-managing the environ-
ment, but yeah ...”

Expert C: “But that is also realistic.”
Expert B: “Yes, true.”

Expert D: “[The game] feels very realistic, because the discussions we
were having, about the board where we were working with, those are
the same discussions you have in practice and the advantage is that
you can quickly update the situation and inspect the effects, so you
really get a feel of what the interventions do.”

The discussion illustrates that these experts found that using the
board to apply interventions felt sufficiently realistic and elicited dis-
cussions similar to those occurring in practice. Experts in other sessions
provided feedback that supported these findings during the debriefings
R.J. den Haan et al.

and in written statements made in the post-game questionnaire. Experts
in the first, third, and fifth sessions did mention that they missed a role
that directly represents the interest of agriculture in the game. As a
result, although facing a financial penalty for the compulsory purchase
of land, they mentioned that they could convert agricultural land into
other land use types without the emotional discussions associated with
the compulsory purchase of land by the government that would occur in
real life.

4.1.3. Experimentation approach

In all sessions, participants used the opportunity to experiment with
interventions. In sessions 1 to 4, the participants applied and evaluated
between 17 and 20 implementations of interventions while playing the
game (Fig. 4). The number of applied interventions in the fifth session
was notably lower, which was probably caused by internet problems
during the session that resulted in a loss of time to play the game. To help
propose interventions, participants used the board as a map to suggest
interventions by hand gestures and used the information both from the
visualizations as well as on the touchscreen to formulate arguments.
Participants experimented with interventions both to test implementa-
tions at several locations, e.g. constructing a side channel on the other
side of the main channel (comparison), and to improve the imple-
mentation at a chosen location (optimization). Especially the floodplain
smoothing intervention led to experimentation, with participants in the
second and third sessions trying eight and eleven implementations,
respectively. In these experimentations, non-experts were observed to
realize that lowering the hydraulic roughness from locations with higher
water flow velocity is effective in increasing the flood safety score.
Furthermore, participants were observed to realize, through experi-
mentation, that changing a production meadow (intensively managed
grassland) to a more natural setting (less managed) is most effective at
increasing biodiversity.

4.2. Experience and social learning outcomes (RQ2)

The second research question was: to what extent does playing the
game lead to social learning outcomes? Here, we describe the partici-
pants’ overall impression on the game and their self-reported learning
outcomes with respect to both cognitive and relational learning.

The questionnaire results indicate that the game was well received
by both domain experts and non-experts (Fig. 5). Most participants
indicated that the game’s goal was clear and that they enjoyed playing
the game. During the debriefings, participants also frequently
mentioned that they regarded the game as a fun activity.

Regarding the learning outcomes, the questionnaire results indicate
that participants gained insights into both cognitive and relational

Environmental Modelling and Software 134 (2020) 104855

learning (Fig. 6). Compared to experts, an equal or higher percentage of
the non-expert participants gave answers to the statements that showed
strong agreement. Below, we discuss the results for experts and non-
experts separately.

Fig. 6 shows that non-experts mostly agreed or strongly agreed with
the twelve statements. Non-experts agreed most with statements 11 and
12 (u = 4.40 and 4.60 respectively) related to relational learning. In
relation to cognitive learning, non-experts agreed most with statements
1 and 10 (both p = 4.20). Only on statement 4 (u = 3.40) about the costs
of interventions did two non-experts give answers that showed strong
disagreement. These participants explained that they had difficulty
interpreting information about costs during the game. In the open
question, non-experts most frequently mentioned insights related to the
functioning of the river system (10) and interventions and trade-offs (6)
categories (SI, Table 5), both associated with cognitive learning. Most of
these insights were broadly formulated, such as “the relation between
flow velocity and flood safety” and “trade-offs between decisions”.

Experts gave more mixed responses to the statements than non-
experts. Experts agreed most strongly with statement 5 (u = 3.87)
related to the trade-offs between interventions. They also rated state-
ments 11 and 12 (| = 3.67 and 3.80 respectively) on relational learning
positively, with most experts only agreeing but a few strongly agreeing.
Statements 6 and 7 () = 2.67 and 2.93 respectively) on hydrodynamic
models were rated poorly, with more experts disagreeing than agreeing
with both statements. This was not an unexpected result as experts
regularly work with these models anyway. In the open question, experts
most frequently mentioned insights related to interventions and trade-
offs (8) and player perspectives (7) (SI, Table 5), associated with
cognitive learning and relational learning, respectively. On the in-
terventions and trade-offs, insights were formulated more specifically
than by non-experts, such as “insight into the ratio of costs of different
interventions” and “more insights into the costs of interventions in
relation to their effectiveness”. Experts indicated in both the question-
naires and the debriefings that they gained such insights as a result of
playing a role different from their day-to-day role.

During the debriefings, participants collectively reflected on what
helped them to obtain their main insights and mentioned the game’s
feedback (all sessions), the shared exploration and experimentation with
interventions (sessions 2, 3, 4 and 5), explanations from other partici-
pants (sessions 1, 2, 4 and 5), and finding it easier to interpret infor-
mation from the game board than from a screen (session 5). In all three
mixed sessions, non-experts explicitly pointed out that the experts had
helped them to understand the problem as well as to predict the con-
sequences of interventions. Experts in turn indicated that collaborative
experimentation with interventions — in combination with the game’s
feedback — helped them to explain river management principles to non-

Participant self-reported overall impressions

 

The goal of the game was clear

 

 
 

 

 

 

The complexity of the game was good

   

Mam Strongly Disagree

   

 

 
    

 

LL U: 4.30, 0: 0.64
 UWLLLLLMAMEMELEEALELAA ALAA A u: 4.47, 0: 0.88
u: 4.00, o: 0.63
The rules of the game were clear ddddddsssdd ss sddsbb sade, us 4.13, 0: 0.62
OT
a u: 4.00, 0: 0.77
Y  ULLILLLILLLIELMMMSAASAEEEDLA, u: 4.20, 0: 0.83
| u: 4.60, 0: 0.49
The game was fun VILLILISILLEUSELIUUEUTDTLLEDDDA 43 | \1: 4.80, 5: 0.40
| _ . .»4+x EZ u: 4.10, 0: 0.54
Would like to play the game again _ WLLLLLLLLLLL MMA ALEEEELDL A, u: 4.20, 0: 0.75
100 80 60 40 20 0 20 40 60 80 100
Percent
™" Disagree Neutral / No opinion Mmm Agree Mm Strongly Agree
Non-experts (n=10) Experts (n=15)

Fig. 5. Overall impressions of the game as reported in the post-game questionnaire based on a 5-point Likert scale. Rating strongly agree counts as 5; strongly
disagree as 1. Graphical representation based on Heiberger and Robbins (2014).

10
R.J. den Haan et al.

Participant self-reported insights

Environmental Modelling and Software 134 (2020) 104855

Fig. 6. Learning outcomes of the game as

 

reported in the post-game questionnaire

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. | obtained insights into river system Hi: 4.20, 0: 0.75 >
functioning LLL) HELLA :3.07,0:0.93 based on a 5-point Likert scale. Rating
strongly agree counts as 5; strongly disagree
2. | obtained insights into effects of : 4.00, 0: 0.63 By a8 By . 8}
interventions on flood safety -3.13,0:1.02 aS 1. The statements relate to the functioning
of the river system (1), the effects of in-
3. | obtained insights into effects of ; : 3.90, o: 0.70 . d thei de-offs (2-5). h
interventions on biodiversity WA SLIILILLLLLLPDAAD Ul: 3.67, 0: 0.79 terventions and their trade-offs (2-5), how
u hydrodynamic models work and are used in
: ici : Lo —— : 3.40, o: 1.43 .. .
4. | obtained insights into the costs H o decision-making (6-7), the roles of and
> of interventions VA VUIULLDLLLLLLM u: 3.53, 0: 0.72
< conflicts between stakeholder roles (8-10),
= 5. | obtained insights into the trade-offs i i.x=IiZZ” H: 3.90,0:0.83 454 the views and perspectives of other
oO between interventions LLLIDILI LLL MAADDA UU: 3.87, 0: 0.72 . .
6 players (11-12). Graphical representation
2 6.1 obtained insights into how an hydrodynamic * 3.80, 0:0.87 based on Heiberger and Robbins (2014).
= model works : 2.67, 0: 0.87
a
S 7. | obtained insights into how an hydrodynamic : 4.00, 0: 0.63
model can be used in decision making UIILMMLLLLA: : 2.93, 0: 0.93
8. | obtained insights into the roles of : 3.70, 0: 0.90
stakeholders in river management VSL LL/, : 3.27, 0: 0.93
9. | obtained insights into the conflicts | iim” LU: 3.50, o: 0.81
between stakeholder roles Uh “UMMA MMA LM u: 3.40, 0: 0.95
10. | obtained insights into how stakeholders | aa: 4.20, 0: 0.60
can work together in river management VILA ; VJALLLLLLLLLLLL LL) u: 3.53, 0: 0.81
i © 11.1 obtained insights into how other players el U: 4.40, o: 0.80
Ss view the problem VA LL Lddddddaa u: 3.67, 0: 0.70
a tS
a @ 12.1 obtained insights into how other players L: 4.60, 0: 0.49
CT view the solutions VA. UMMMMMLLLLLLLLLLLLLLDDA Ui: 3.80, 0: 0.65
100 80 60 40. 20 0 20 40 #60 #480 100
Percent
Ma Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral / No opinion Mm Agree Mam Strongly Agree
Non-experts (n=10) Experts (n=15)
experts. cognitive learning. However, experts rated the statements in a more

5. Discussion

In this section, we first reflect on the potential value of the Virtual
River Game as a participatory tool based on the study’s results. Next, we
discuss the design of the game and its interface. We end the section by
reflecting on the study and outlining its limitations.

5.1. Game as a participatory tool

The results of the sessions indicate that the game was successful at
engaging both domain experts and non-experts in collaboratively
exploring and experimenting with river interventions. In all sessions, the
participants developed a shared understanding of the problem. To
address the problem, they applied and tested various implementations of
interventions. Although the participants did not develop a collective
strategy from the start, they did collaboratively plan ahead while
applying interventions, discussing how future interventions could
further improve the indicator scores and contribute to achieving the
various objectives. Experts and non-experts were both active in the
games’ discussions, with experts taking more of a leading role, especially
at the start of the games. Furthermore, experts noted that the discussions
and considerations that they had during the game reflect well those
found in real-world projects.

The results further indicate that the Virtual River Game stimulated
social learning for both experts (N = 15) and non-experts (N = 10).
Considering the game’s scope and the operationalization of social
learning, we looked specifically at cognitive learning (acquiring new or
restructuring existing knowledge) and relational learning (increasing
the understanding of the mind-set and perspectives of others) (Baird
et al., 2014; Ensor and Harvey, 2015). With only a few exceptions,
non-experts rated all statements in relation to the game’s learning out-
comes positively. According to their comments, the main insights that
non-experts emphasized were almost exclusively associated with

11

mixed way, with some statements rated positively but some statements
associated with cognitive learning neutrally to negatively. We expected
that experts would report less cognitive learning given their background
knowledge. The statements on relational learning were rated positively
by experts, which was also reflected in their reported main insights.
Taken together, we conclude that both domain experts and non-experts
learned by playing the game. However, the extent to which they learned
and emphasis they placed on it varied. The game appears to be partic-
ularly valuable as a participatory tool to introduce non-expert stake-
holders to river management in the Netherlands. Keijser et al. (2018)
reported similar results from their game on marine spatial planning,
showing that their game worked well as an introductory game to engage
non-experts on the topic.

On learning more generally, our results are in line with evaluations
of other serious games (see e.g. reviews by Aubert et al., 2018; den Haan
and van der Voort, 2018; Flood et al., 2018), which have shown that
serious games are an effective way of increasing the understanding of
physical systems (Becu et al., 2017; Carson et al., 2018; Keijser et al.,
2018), of raising awareness (Onencan and Van de Walle, 2018; Ste-
fanska et al., 2011; Van Pelt et al., 2015), and of increasing the under-
standing of alternative views and perspectives (Douven et al., 2014;
Jean et al., 2018; Souchere et al., 2010). Combining the results on
collaborative exploration and learning, this study offers further evidence
that serious games are effective ways of improving social learning
(Hofstede et al., 2010; Medema et al., 2016; Savic et al., 2016).

5.2. Game and interface design

Serious games are increasingly explored as learning-based in-
terventions in environmental management (Aubert et al., 2019; Flood
et al., 2018; Rodela et al., 2019). In terms of the design of such games,
this work contributes to the growing body of literature by proposing a
new, hybrid interface design concept: the bidirectional coupling of a
physical game board to computer models. Whereas other serious games
R.J. den Haan et al.

on environmental management tend to use simplified, custom computer
models that are location-specific (e.g. Craven et al., 2017; Valkering
et al., 2013), our focus was on creating a simplified — yet realistic - 3D
representation of a typical stretch of a Dutch river in combination with
models currently used in practice. Designing serious games always re-
quires some form of simplification to strike a good balance between an
accurate representation of reality, the playability of reality, and the
meaning of the game (Harteveld, 2011). In our approach, the biggest
simplification of the physical reality was not in the models, but in the
fact that the board uses a fixed, hexagonal grid. We applied this
simplification mainly to increase playability; the fixed number and
shape of the tiles reduces the level of detail in relation to a real stretch of
river and provides a manageable structure by limiting the number of
possible arrangements in the game. The sessions showed that the game
board design facilitated participants working together and, as an inter-
face, enabled especially non-experts to work with models currently used
in practice. Moreover, experts determined that the game triggered dis-
cussions that also occur in practice. Therefore, simplifying a river stretch
to a hexagonal grid proved to be a suitable approach to balancing a good
representation of reality with playability. Increasing the level of detail in
the game could be further explored, but is not necessary to facilitate the
collaborative exploration of and experimentation with river
interventions.

In addition to serving its specific purpose, the hybrid interface offers
qualities that we see as beneficial to facilitating stakeholder participa-
tion in environmental management and to improving social learning.
Serious games have been developed as board games (Hertzog et al.,
2014; Keijser et al., 2018; Speelman et al., 2014), as digital games
(Ayadi et al., 2014; Carson et al., 2018; Craven et al., 2017; Hill et al.,
2014), and as hybrid games combining elements of board and digital
games (Cleland et al., 2012; Magnuszewski et al., 2018; Valkering et al.,
2013; Van der Wal et al., 2016). Such games have a common feature that
participants are provided with an experimentation environment in
which they can collaboratively and safely explore both the
techno-physical and socio-political complexity of an environmental
system. With the hybrid interface design of the Virtual River Game, we
combined three qualities that are separately found in board and com-
puter games. These qualities are described below.

First, the hybrid interface provides participants with a physical,
tangible object to engage with in shared exploration. Through the game
board and touchscreen, control of the game is shared and not limited to a
facilitator or one participant controlling an input device. Participants
engage in discussions by moving game tiles or pointing to locations on
the game board, making their views explicit to other participants
(Stanton et al., 2001; Suzuki and Kato, 1995).

Second, as an interface, the game board appeared to lower the
threshold for participating while allowing participants to collabora-
tively work with computer models by using tangible objects, removing
the need to have specific expertise in using these models. Computer
games have been developed as interaction layers to models based on a
GUI (Chew et al., 2013; Craven et al., 2017; van Hardeveld et al., 2019),
but without the use of tangible objects as a direct source of input. In turn,
games have been developed that use a non-digital board in combination
with computer models (Magnuszewski et al., 2018; Stefanska et al.,
2011), but without either a direct connection to the models or the
models’ output being visualized on the board. In the Virtual River Game,
the bidirectional link between the board and models provides partici-
pants with visualizations of their actions at the same location as where
they made them.

Third, for a serious game in general, being able to experiment with
interventions is a valuable way of triggering learning (Becu et al., 2017;
Ferrero et al., 2018). Multiplayer serious games that focus on managing
a spatial area generally include interventions as binary options that can
be turned on or off for defined locations (Carson et al., 2018; Craven
et al., 2017; Rusca et al., 2012). This can include a few options of the
same interventions at the same locations, such as small, medium, and

12

Environmental Modelling and Software 134 (2020) 104855

large versions (Onencan et al., 2016; Savic et al., 2016; Valkering et al.,
2013). In the Virtual River Game, participants determine the location,
direction, shape, and size of interventions by replacing tiles on the board
while following rules defined outside the software. Therefore, the
interface increases the experimentation potential by including the
design of interventions rather than choosing predefined intervention
options. In serious games, similar functionality is found in tile-based
computer games (e.g. Becu et al., 2017; Chew et al., 2013), but not in
combination with tangible tiles. This type of functionality is also found
in planning support systems in which participants can draw and apply
interventions on a tabletop surface (see e.g. Leskens et al., 2014; Vonk
and Ligtenberg, 2010). To summarize, the hybrid interface combines the
strengths of board games (accessibility, tangibility) with the power and
flexibility of computer games (modeling, visualizations) which, in
combination, are beneficial to supporting stakeholder participation and
improving social learning.

5.3. Reflection and limitations

In all sessions, the participants focused mainly on increasing the
flood safety score in the early game rounds and only focused on the
biodiversity score during later rounds. This approach is consistent with
current Dutch river management practice in which improving flood
safety is the primary objective (see e.g. Deltaprogramma, 2019). How-
ever, some choices in the Virtual River Game’s design and the choice of
participants invited to the sessions may have influenced the partici-
pants’ focus on improving their flood safety scores. Although no
distinction between primary and secondary objectives is made in the
game, the in-game interventions are based on interventions imple-
mented in reality that do have the improvement of flood safety as the
primary objective. The sessions’ starting conditions may have further
nudged participants to first focus on the flood safety indicator as its
initial score (29%) was lower than the biodiversity score (47%). In
addition, some flood safety specialists were observed to approach the
game as if they were initially in their real-world roles.

Besides these possible influences on the results, the study has two
other limitations. In general, a serious game aims to provide participants
with a safe space to experiment, to take on another role, and to defend
positions that they may not take in reality (De Caluwe et al., 2012;
Geurts et al., 2007; Mayer, 2009). The results of this study suggest that
the game provides this sense of safety as participants experimented with
interventions to pursue the objectives of their assigned role. In partic-
ular, domain experts were observed to propose and experiment with
interventions that ran counter to objectives that they would normally
pursue in their real-world roles. However, the sessions were organized
outside of a real-world policy-making setting. Therefore, the first limi-
tation of the study is that we do not know if the game would also
establish the same sense of safety in experimenting with interventions
and defending positions of other stakeholder roles when played in the
context of a real-world river project. This needs to be explored in future
research. Before the game is used in a real river project, the roles in the
game must be reviewed. In particular, based on the results of this study,
adding an additional role that actively defends the interests of the
agricultural sector must be considered. This role was initially left out to
limit the game’s complexity. In order not to increase the game’s
complexity, an alternative could be to consider the current game as an
introductory level and add a second game level with additional objec-
tives, indicators, roles, and interventions.

The second limitation lies in the limited number of sessions and
participants. Conducting studies on serious games is time-consuming,
both for the participants and for the researchers. As a result, the num-
ber of expert and non-expert participants was too low to be able to draw
statistically significant conclusions. Consequently, we looked at these
two groups separately and have not made comparisons between the
learning outcomes of experts and non-experts. However, despite the
limitations, the results indicate that the game may well be useful as a
R.J. den Haan et al.

tool to help support stakeholder participation in Dutch river
management.

6. Conclusion

In this paper, we presented the design of the Virtual River Game and
investigated its potential value as a participatory tool in Dutch river
management. Based on the results of five sessions, we showed that the
game was successful in: (1) facilitating domain experts and non-experts
to collaboratively experiment with river interventions that are
commonly applied in the Netherlands and to elicit discussions similar to
those that occur in real-world river projects; and (2) establishing social
learning outcomes as both experts and non-experts indicated that they
had learned by playing the game. Through self-reporting, non-experts
indicated that most gained insights into the game’s learning objectives
and emphasized their learning about the functioning of the river system
and about river interventions and their inevitable trade-offs. Experts, in
turn, reported more mixed results regarding the learning objectives and
emphasized learning about river interventions and their inevitable

Appendix

Table Al

Environmental Modelling and Software 134 (2020) 104855

trade-offs, as well as about the views and perspectives of other partici-
pants. As a participatory tool, we conclude that the substantial value of
the game lies in introducing non-expert stakeholders to Dutch river
management.

Funding

This research is part of the research program RiverCare: towards self-
sustaining multifunctional rivers, supported by the Netherlands Orga-
nization for Scientific Research (NWO) and partly funded by the Min-
istry of Economic Affairs under grant number P12-14 (Perspective
Program).

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Land use options in the game and the translation to specific roughness classes (Scholten and Stout, 2013) and ecotopes (Van der Molen et al., 2003), including their
fractional surface area in a tile. For example, the tile representing the main channel that includes a longitudinal training dam is assigned roughness class 102 and has a
fractional surface area of 0.6 in the ecotope labeled as ‘deep main channel’ (RzD in the Dutch ecotope system of large water bodies) and 0.4 of the surface area is taken

by the ecotope for medium depth side channel (RnM).

Land use of hexagon Roughness class of

hexagon hexagon
Elevation level 0 on the game board - main channel
main channel with groins 102 * RzD
main channel with LTD 102 * RzD
Elevation level 1 — secondary channel
secondary channel 105 RnM
Elevation level 2 — lower floodplain
built-up land, floodplain 114 UA-2
production meadow, floodplain 1201 UG-2
natural grassland, floodplain 1202 UG-1
reed, floodplain 1215 IV.9
shrubs, floodplain 1231 UB-2
forest, floodplain 1245 UB-1
mixtype, 70 natural grassland 30 forest, 1202/1245 UG-1
floodplain
Elevation level 3 — higher floodplain
built-up land, natural levee 114 OA-2
production meadow, natural levee 1201 OG-2
natural grassland, natural levee 1202 OG-1
reed, natural levee 1215 HM-1
shrubs, natural levee 1231 OB-2
forest, natural levee 1245 OB-1
mixtype, 70 natural grassland 30 forest, 1202/1245 OG-1
natural levee
Elevation level 4 — dikes
dike 1201 - **
reinforced dike 1201 - **

Dominant ecotope in

Fraction subdominant
ecotope

Fraction dominant
ecotope

Subdominant ecotope in
hexagon

I.2
RnM

0.75
0.6

0.25
0.4

RnM 1 0

UA-2
UG-2
UG-1
IV.9

UB-2
UB-1
UB-1

OrRPrFPFP PPE
oooooo;o

OA-2
OG-2
OG-1
HM-1
OB-2
OB-1
OB-1

ORFF RPP
ooooooo

K* a K* a K*

a K* a K* a K*

* The groins and LTDs could only be included in Delft3D FM through the BMI by manipulating the DEM to include their shapes in the elevation. As a result, the main

channel is used as a roughness class for both.

** Dikes are not considered part of the area evaluated for biodiversity and thus are not assigned an ecotope.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2020.104855.

13
R.J. den Haan et al.

References

Ampatzidou, C., Gugerell, K., Constantinescu, T., Devisch, O., Jauschneg, M., Berger, M.,
2018. All work and No play? Facilitating serious games and gamified applications in
participatory urban planning and governance. Urban Planning 3 (1), 34-46.

Aubert, A.H., Bauer, R., Lienert, J., 2018. A review of water-related serious games to
specify use in environmental multi-criteria decision analysis. Environ. Model.
Software 105, 64-78.

Aubert, A.H., Medema, W., Wals, A.E., 2019. Towards a framework for designing and
assessing game-based approaches for sustainable water governance. Water 11 (4),
869.

Ayadi, H., Le Bars, M., Le Grusse, P., Mandart, E., Fabre, J., Bouaziz, A., Bord, J., 2014.
SimPhy: a simulation game to lessen the impact of phytosanitaries on health and the
environment—the case of Merja Zerga in Morocco. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 21 (7),
4950-4963.

Baart, F., 2017. Python Wrapper for BMI Models. https://pypi.org/project/bmi-python/.

Baird, J., Plummer, R., Haug, C., Huitema, D., 2014. Learning effects of interactive
decision-making processes for climate change adaptation. Global Environ. Change
27, 51-63.

Becu, N., Amalric, M., Anselme, B., Beck, E., Bertin, X., Delay, E., Long, N., Marilleau, N.,
Pignon-Mussaud, C., Rousseaux, F., 2017. Participatory simulation to foster social
learning on coastal flooding prevention. Environ. Model. Software 98, 1-11.

Bekebrede, G., 2010. Experiencing Complexity: a Gaming Approach for Understanding
Infrastructure Systems. TU Delft, Delft University of Technology.

Bekebrede, G., Lo, J., Lukosch, H., 2015. Understanding complex systems through mental
models and shared experiences: a case study. Simulat. Gaming 46 (5), 536-562.
Bekebrede, G., van Bueren, E., Wenzler, I., 2018. Towards a joint local energy transition

process in urban districts: the GO2Zero simulation game. Sustainability 10 (8), 1-20.

Berends, K.D., Straatsma, M.W., Warmink, J.J., Hulscher, S.J., 2019. Uncertainty
quantification of flood mitigation predictions and implications for interventions.
Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 19 (8), 1737-1753.

Berkes, F., 2009. Evolution of co-management: role of knowledge generation, bridging
organizations and social learning. J. Environ. Manag. 90 (5), 1692-1702.

Carson, A., Windsor, M., Hill, H., Haigh, T., Wall, N., Smith, J., Olsen, R., Bathke, D.,
Demir, I., Muste, M., 2018. Serious gaming for participatory planning of multi-
hazard mitigation. Int. J. River Basin Manag. 16 (3), 379-391.

Chew, C., Lloyd, G.J., Knudsen, E., 2013. An Interactive Capacity Building
Experience-An Approach with Serious Games. Serious Games and Social Connect
Conference, Singapore.

Cleland, D., Dray, A., Perez, P., Cruz-Trinidad, A., Geronimo, R., 2012. Simulating the
dynamics of subsistence fishing communities: REEFGAME as a learning and data-
gathering computer-assisted role-play game. Simulat. Gaming 43 (1), 102-117.

Craven, J., Angarita, H., Perez, G.C., Vasquez, D., 2017. Development and testing of a
river basin management simulation game for integrated management of the
Magdalena-Cauca river basin. Environ. Model. Software 90, 78-88.

Cundill, G., Rodela, R., 2012. A review of assertions about the processes and outcomes of
social learning in natural resource management. J. Environ. Manag. 113, 7-14.

De Caluwé, L., Geurts, J., Kleinlugtenbelt, W.J., 2012. Gaming research in policy and
organization: an assessment from The Netherlands. Simulat. Gaming 43 (5),
600-626.

De Nooij, R.J.W., Lenders, H.J.R., Leuven, R.S.E.W., De Blust, G., Geilen, N.,
Goldschmidt, B., Muller, S., Poudevigne, I., Nienhuis, P.H., 2004. BIO-SAFE:
assessing the impacts of physical reconstruction on protected and endangered
species. River Res. Appl. 20 (3), 299-313.

Deltaprogramma, 2019. Deltaprogramma 2020: Doorwerken aan de delta: nuchter, alert
en voorbereid. Ministry of Intrastructure and Environment; Ministry of Agriculture,
Nature, and Food Quality; and Ministry of Internal Affairs and Kindom
Relationships.

den Haan, R.-J., Fliervoet, J.M., van der Voort, M.C., Cortes Arevalo, V.J., Hulscher, S.J.
M.H., 2018. Understanding actor perspectives regarding challenges for integrated
river basin management. Int. J. River Basin Manag. 1-14.

den Haan, R.-J., van der Voort, M.C., 2018. On evaluating social learning outcomes of
serious games to collaboratively address sustainability problems: a literature review.
Sustainability 10 (12), 4529.

Douven, W., Mul, M.L., Son, L., Bakker, N., Radosevich, G., Hendriks, A., 2014. Games to
create awareness and design policies for transboundary cooperation in river basins:
lessons from the shariva game of the Mekong river commission. Water Resour.
Manag. 28 (5), 1431-1447.

Edelenbos, J., Van Buuren, A., Roth, D., Winnubst, M., 2017. Stakeholder initiatives in
flood risk management: exploring the role and impact of bottom-up initiatives in
three ‘Room for the River’ projects in The Netherlands. J. Environ. Plann. Manag. 60
(1), 47-66.

Ensor, J., Harvey, B., 2015. Social learning and climate change adaptation: evidence for
international development practice. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate
Change 6 (5), 509-522.

Ferrero, G., Bichai, F., Rusca, M., 2018. Experiential learning through role-playing:
enhancing stakeholder collaboration in water safety plans. Water 10 (2), 227.
Fliervoet, J.M., Van den Born, R.J., Smits, A., Knippenberg, L., 2013. Combining safety
and nature: a multi-stakeholder perspective on integrated floodplain management.

J. Environ. Manag. 128, 1033-1042.

Flood, S., Cradock-Henry, N.A., Blackett, P., Edwards, P., 2018. Adaptive and interactive
climate futures: systematic review of ‘serious games’ for engagement and decision-
making. Environ. Res. Lett. 13 (6), 063005.

Geurts, J.L., Duke, R.D., Vermeulen, P.A., 2007. Policy gaming for strategy and change.
Long. Range Plan. 40 (6), 535-558.

14

Environmental Modelling and Software 134 (2020) 104855

Harteveld, C., 2011. Triadic Game Design: Balancing Reality, Meaning and Play. Springer
Science & Business Media.

Heiberger, R.M., Robbins, N.B., 2014. Design of diverging stacked bar charts for Likert
scales and other applications. J. Stat. Software 57 (5), 1-32.

Hertzog, T., Poussin, J.-C., Tangara, B., Kouriba, I., Jamin, J.-Y., 2014. A role playing
game to address future water management issues in a large irrigated system:
experience from Mali. Agric. Water Manag. 137, 1-14.

Hill, H., Hadarits, M., Rieger, R., Strickert, G., Davies, E.G., Strobbe, K.M., 2014. The
Invitational Drought Tournament: what is it and why is it a useful tool for drought
preparedness and adaptation? Weather and Climate Extremes 3, 107-116.

Hofstede, G.J., De Caluwé, L., Peters, V., 2010. Why simulation games work-in search of
the active substance: a synthesis. Simulat. Gaming 41 (6), 824-843.

Hornecker, E., Buur, J., 2006. Getting a grip on tangible interaction: a framework on
physical space and social interaction. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, pp. 437-446.

Ishii, H., 2008. Tangible bits: beyond pixels. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction. ACM, pp. xv—xxv.

Jean, S., Medema, W., Adamowski, J., Chew, C., Delaney, P., Wals, A., 2018. Serious
games as a catalyst for boundary crossing, collaboration and knowledge co-creation
in a watershed governance context. J. Environ. Manag. 223, 1010-1022.

Keijser, X., Ripken, M., Mayer, I., Warmelink, H., Abspoel, L., Fairgrieve, R., Paris, C.,
2018. Stakeholder engagement in maritime spatial planning: the efficacy of a serious
game approach. Water 10 (6), 724.

Kernkamp, H.W., Van Dam, A., Stelling, G.S., de Goede, E.D., 2011. Efficient scheme for
the shallow water equations on unstructured grids with application to the
Continental Shelf. Ocean Dynam. 61 (8), 1175-1188.

Klijn, F., de Bruin, D., de Hoog, M.C., Jansen, S., Sijmons, D.F., 2013. Design quality of
room-for-the-river measures in The Netherlands: role and assessment of the quality
team (Q-team). Int. J. River Basin Manag. 11 (3), 287-299.

Klijn, F., de Haes, H.A.U., 1994. A hierarchical approach to ecosystems and its
implications for ecological land classification. Landsc. Ecol. 9 (2), 89-104.

Klopstra, D., Barneveld, H., Van Noortwijk, J., Van Velzen, E., 1996. Analytical model for
hydraulic roughness of submerged vegetation. In: Proceedings of the Congress-
International Association for Hydraulic Research. LOCAL ORGANIZING
COMMITTEE of the XXV CONGRESS, pp. 775-780.

Kriz, W.C., 2010. A systemic-constructivist approach to the facilitation and debriefing of
simulations and games. Simulat. Gaming 41 (5), 663-680.

Lenders, H.J.R., Leuven, R.S.E.W., Nienhuis, P.H., De Nooij, R.J.W., Van Rooij, S.A.M.,
2001. BIO-SAFE: a method for evaluation of biodiversity values on the basis of
political and legal criteria. Landsc. Urban Plann. 55, 121-137.

Leskens, J., Brugnach, M., Hoekstra, A.Y., 2014. Application of an interactive water
simulation model in urban water management: a case study in Amsterdam. Water
Sci. Technol. 70 (11), 1729-1739.

Magnuszewski, P., Krélikowska, K., Koch, A., Pajak, M., Allen, C., Chraibi, V., Giri, A.,
Haak, D., Hart, N., Hellman, M., 2018. Exploring the role of relational practices in
water governance using a game-based approach. Water 10 (3), 346.

Mayer, I., 2009. The gaming of policy and the politics of gaming: a review. Simulat.
Gaming 40 (6), 825-862.

Mayer, I., Zhou, Q., Lo, J., Abspoel, L., Keijser, X., Olsen, E., Nixon, E., Kannen, A., 2013.
Integrated, ecosystem-based marine spatial planning: design and results of a game-
based, quasi-experiment. Ocean Coast Manag. 82, 7-26.

Medema, W., Furber, A., Adamowski, J., Zhou, Q., Mayer, I., 2016. Exploring the
potential impact of serious games on social learning and stakeholder collaborations
for transboundary watershed management of the St. Lawrence River Basin. Water 8
(5), 175.

Michael, D.R., Chen, S.L., 2005. Serious Games: Games that Educate, Train, and Inform.
Muska & Lipman/Premier-Trade.

Muro, M., Jeffrey, P., 2008. A critical review of the theory and application of social
learning in participatory natural resource management processes. J. Environ. Plann.
Manag. 51 (3), 325-344.

Onencan, A., Van de Walle, B., Enserink, B., Chelang’a, J., Kulei, F., 2016. WeSharelt
Game: strategic foresight for climate-change induced disaster risk reduction.
Procedia engineering 159, 307-315.

Onencan, A.M., Van de Walle, B., 2018. From paris agreement to action: enhancing
climate change familiarity and situation awareness. Sustainability 10 (6), 2071-
1050.

Pahl-Wostl, C., 2007. The implications of complexity for integrated resources
management. Environ. Model. Software 22 (5), 561-569.

Pahl-Wostl, C., Tabara, D., Bouwen, R., Craps, M., Dewulf, A., Mostert, E., Ridder, D.,
Taillieu, T., 2008. The importance of social learning and culture for sustainable
water management. Ecol. Econ. 64 (3), 484-495.

Peckham, S.D., Hutton, E.W., Norris, B.J.C., 2013. A component-based approach to
integrated modeling in the geosciences: the design of CSDMS. Geosciences 53, 3-12.

Redpath, S.M., Keane, A., Andrén, H., Baynham-Herd, Z., Bunnefeld, N., Duthie, A.B.,
Frank, J., Garcia, C.A., Mansson, J., Nilsson, L., 2018. Games as tools to address
conservation conflicts. Trends Ecol. Evol. 33 (6), 415-426.

Reed, M.S., 2008. Stakeholder participation for environmental management: a literature
review. Biol. Conserv. 141 (10), 2417-2431.

Reed, M.S., Evely, A.C., Cundill, G., Fazey, I., Glass, J., Laing, A., Newig, J., Parrish, B.,
Prell, C., Raymond, C., 2010. What is social learning? Ecol. Soc. 15 (4).

Rijke, J., van Herk, S., Zevenbergen, C., Ashley, R., 2012. Room for the river: delivering
integrated river basin management in The Netherlands. Int. J. River Basin Manag. 10
(4), 369-382.

Rijkswaterstaat, 2012. Vegetatiebeheer Grote Rivieren. Rijkswaterstaat Waterdienst.

Rodela, R., 2011. Social learning and natural resource management: the emergence of
three research perspectives. Ecol. Soc. 16 (4).
R.J. den Haan et al.

Rodela, R., Ligtenberg, A., Bosma, R., 2019. Conceptualizing serious games as a learning-
based intervention in the context of natural resources and environmental
governance. Water 11 (2), 245.

Rusca, M., Heun, J., Schwartz, K., 2012. Water management simulation games and the
construction of knowledge. Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci. 16 (8), 2749-2757.

Savic, D.A., Morley, M.S., Khoury, M., 2016. Serious gaming for water systems planning
and management. Water 8 (10), 456.

Scholten, M., Stout, J., 2013. Dataprotocol Baseline 5.2.2. Rijkswaterstaat Waterdienst,
Deltares.

Souchere, V., Millair, L., Echeverria, J., Bousquet, F., Le Page, C., Etienne, M., 2010. Co-
constructing with stakeholders a role-playing game to initiate collective
management of erosive runoff risks at the watershed scale. Environ. Model. Software
25 (11), 1359-1370.

Speelman, E., Garcia-Barrios, L., Groot, J., Tittonell, P., 2014. Gaming for smallholder
participation in the design of more sustainable agricultural landscapes. Agric. Syst.
126, 62-75.

Stanton, D., Bayon, V., Neale, H., Ghali, A., Benford, S., Cobb, S., Ingram, R.,
O’Malley, C., Wilson, J., Pridmore, T., 2001. Classroom collaboration in the design
of tangible interfaces for storytelling. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, pp. 482-489.

Stefanska, J., Magnuszewski, P., Sendzimir, J., Romaniuk, P., Taillieu, T., Dubel, A.,
Flachner, Z., Balogh, P., 2011. A gaming exercise to explore problem-solving versus
relational activities for river floodplain management. Environmental Policy and
Governance 21 (6), 454-471.

Straatsma, M.W., Bloecker, A.M., Lenders, H.J.R., Leuven, R.S.E.W., Kleinhans, M.G.,
2017. Biodiversity recovery following delta-wide measures for flood risk reduction.
Science Advances 3 (11), e1602762.

Straatsma, M.W., Fliervoet, J.M., Kabout, J.A., Baart, F., Kleinhans, M.G., 2019. Towards
multi-objective optimization of large-scale fluvial landscaping measures. Nat.
Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 19 (6), 1167-1187.

Susi, T., Johannesson, M., Backlund, P., 2007. Serious Games: an Overview. Institutionen
for kommunikation och information.

Suzuki, H., Kato, H., 1995. Interaction-level Support for Collaborative Learning:
AlgoBlock—An Open Programming Language, the First International Conference on
Computer Support for Collaborative Learning. L. Erlbaum Associates Inc.,
pp. 349-355

Tygron, 2018. REST API. Tygron. https://support.tygron.com/wiki/REST_API.

15

Environmental Modelling and Software 134 (2020) 104855

Valkering, P., van der Brugge, R., Offermans, A., Haasnoot, M., Vreugdenhil, H., 2013.
A perspective-based simulation game to explore future pathways of a water-society
system under climate change. Simulat. Gaming 44 (2-3), 366-390.

Van den Hoogen, J., Lo, J., Meijer, S., 2014. The debriefing of research games: a
structured approach for the validation of gaming simulation outcomes. In: ISAGA
2014: 45th Conference of the International Simulation and Gaming Association:
Dornbirn, Australia.

Van der Molen, D.T., Geilen, N., Backx, J.J.G.M., Jansen, B.J.M., Wolfert, H.P., 2003.
Water Ecotope Classification for Integrated Water Management in the Netherlands.
European Water Management Online.

Van der Wal, M.M., De Kraker, J., Kroeze, C., Kirschner, P.A., Valkering, P., 2016. Can
computer models be used for social learning? A serious game in water management.
Environ. Model. Software 75, 119-132.

van Hardeveld, H., Driessen, P., Schot, P., Wassen, M., 2019. How Interactive
Simulations Can Improve the Support of Environmental management—Lessons from
the Dutch Peatlands. Environmental Modelling & Software.

Van Pelt, S., Haasnoot, M., Arts, B., Ludwig, F., Swart, R., Biesbroek, R., 2015.
Communicating climate (change) uncertainties: simulation games as boundary
objects. Environ. Sci. Pol. 45, 41-52.

Van Stokkom, H.T., Smits, A.J., Leuven, R.S., 2005. Flood defense in The Netherlands: a
new era, a new approach. Water Int. 30 (1), 76-87.

Verbrugge, L., Buchecker, M., Garcia, X., Gottwald, S., Miiller, S., Prestholm, S.,
Olafsson, A.S., 2019. Integrating sense of place in planning and management of
multifunctional river landscapes: experiences from five European case studies.
Sustainability Science 14 (3), 669-680.

Voinov, A., Kolagani, N., McCall, M.K., Glynn, P.D., Kragt, M.E., Ostermann, F.O.,
Pierce, S.A., Ramu, P., 2016. Modelling with stakeholders-next generation. Environ.
Model. Software 77, 196-220.

Vonk, G., Ligtenberg, A., 2010. Socio-technical PSS development to improve
functionality and usability—sketch planning using a Maptable. Landsc. Urban Plann.
94 (3-4), 166-174.

Warmerdam, J., Knepflé, M., Bidarra, R., Bekebrede, G., Mayer, I., 2006. SimPort: a
multiplayer management game framework. In: 9th International Conference on
Computer Games (CGAMES06), Dublin, Ireland.

Warner, J.F., van Buuren, A., Edelenbos, J., 2012. Making Space for the River. IWA
publishing.

Zevenbergen, C., Rijke, J., Van Herk, S., Bloemen, P., 2015. Room for the river: a
stepping stone in adaptive delta management. International Journal of Water
Governance 3 (1), 121-140.
