NP] | Digital Medicine

ARTICLE OPEN

www.nature.com/npjdigitalmed

® Check for updates

The state of artificial intelligence-based FDA-approved
medical devices and algorithms: an online database

Stan Benjamens@®'”, Pranavsingh Dhunnoo® and Bertalan Mesko @**

At the beginning of the artificial intelligence (Al)/machine learning (ML) era, the expectations are high, and experts foresee that Al/
ML shows potential for diagnosing, managing and treating a wide variety of medical conditions. However, the obstacles for
implementation of AI/ML in daily clinical practice are numerous, especially regarding the regulation of these technologies.
Therefore, we provide an insight into the currently available Al/ML-based medical devices and algorithms that have been approved
by the US Food & Drugs Administration (FDA). We aimed to raise awareness of the importance of regulatory bodies, clearly stating
whether a medical device is Al/ML based or not. Cross-checking and validating all approvals, we identified 64 Al/ML based, FDA
approved medical devices and algorithms. Out of those, only 29 (45%) mentioned any Al/ML-related expressions in the official FDA
announcement. The majority (85.9%) was approved by the FDA with a 510(k) clearance, while 8 (12.5%) received de novo pathway
clearance and one (1.6%) premarket approval (PMA) clearance. Most of these technologies, notably 30 (46.9%), 16 (25.0%), and 10
(15.6%) were developed for the fields of Radiology, Cardiology and Internal Medicine/General Practice respectively. We have
launched the first comprehensive and open access database of strictly Al/ML-based medical technologies that have been approved

by the FDA. The database will be constantly updated.

npj Digital Medicine (2020)3:118; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-020-00324-0

INTRODUCTION

The 2010s has brought a rise in the number of studies and papers
discussing the role of artificial intelligence (Al) and machine
learning (ML) in medicine and healthcare (Al/ML). The number of
life science papers describing AI/ML rose from 596 in 2010 to
12,422 in 2019. While we are at the beginning of the Al/ML era, the
expectations are high and experts foresee that AI/ML shows
potential for diagnosing, managing and treating a wide variety of
medical conditions’.

Indeed, Al/ML-based technologies have been shown to support
several medical specialties from radiology* and oncology” to
ophthalmology* and general medical decision-making>. ML
models have been shown to reduce waiting times®; improve
medication adherence’; customize insulin dosages®; or help
interpret magnetic resonance images’, among others.

Despite its promise, the obstacles for implementation of Al/ML
in daily clinical practice are numerous”. These include issues with
transparency surrounding these software programs, the inherent
bias in the data they are fed with and how secure they are. A
crucial element shaping these obstacles is regulating such
technologies. The very use of the term Al requires further
clarification, as multiple subtypes have been proposed, and its
meaning can be vague. For the sake of further investments and
the public image, companies tend to overuse the term Al, when in
fact they have developed algorithms which are not Al/ML-based
per se.

We classify a technology as AI/ML based if official FDA
announcements, communications by the company or other
publicly available information resources used the expressions
‘deep learning,’ ‘machine learning,’ ‘deep neural networks,’
‘artificial intelligence, and/or ‘Al’ to describe the technology''.
For simplicity, we use the term “Al/ML-based” to denote these

technologies in this paper.With the increasing expertise and
attention on AI/ML in the medical field, the opportunities and
possible implications of its use are the topics of an ongoing
debate'*. A crucial element in this implementation debate is
regulating such technologies.

As studies about Al's role in medicine show, its use cases and
companies developing such technologies have been skyrocketing,
regulatory bodies, such as the US Food & Drugs Administration
(FDA) and the European Medicine Agency (EMA), have tried to
tackle its regulation and implementation. As the FDA has shown
leadership regarding the adoption of AIl/ML-based medical
technologies, with a specific framework for Al/ML-based algo-
rithms, we chose it as an example for further analysis'’.

Because of the high-risk nature of these medical devices and
the unknown consequences of using AI/ML for medical decision-
making and data analysis, the FDA has stringent regulatory
requirements for medical device licensing. Developers of AI/ML-
based medical devices and algorithms have to go through
rigorous processes that are time and resource consuming. This
can be considered pivotal as a barrier for the introduction of Al/ML
in medicine.

Before medical hardware or software is legally made available in
the US market, the parent company has to submit it to the FDA for
evaluation. For medically oriented Al/ML-based algorithms, the
regulatory body has three levels of clearance, namely, 510(k)'%,
premarket approval’? and the de novo pathway’®, each of which
needs specific criteria to be fulfilled in order to be granted (Table 1).

For the development and marketing of medical algorithms, the
FDA's stringent regulatory requirements pose important chal-
lenges to the companies developing them. Before, every new
product had to go through the regulatory process. However, as
companies update their algorithms on a much shorter time scale,

‘Department of Surgery, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. *Medical Imaging Center, University Medical Center
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. *The Medical Futurist Institute, Budapest, Hungary. “Department of Behavioural Sciences, Semmelweis

University, Budapest, Hungary. “email: berci@medicalfuturist.com

Seoul National University Bundang Hospital

np} nature partner

journals
np}

S. Benjamens et al.

 

Table 1.
Level of FDA clearance Description

510(k) clearance

Descriptions of the types of FDA approvals for Al/ML-based medical technologies.

A 510(k) clearance for an algorithm is granted when it has been shown to be at least as safe and effective as another similar,

legally marketed algorithm. The submitter seeking this clearance must provide substantial proof of equivalence in their
application. Without an approval of being substantially equivalent to the other algorithm, the one pending approval cannot

be legally marketed.
Premarket approval

Premarket approval is issued to algorithms for Class II] medical devices. The latter are those that can have a large impact on

human health and as such, their evaluation undergo more thorough scientific and regulatory processes to determine their
safety and effectiveness. In order to approve an application, the FDA determines that the device's safety and effectiveness is
supported by satisfactory scientific evidence. Upon approval, the applicant can proceed with marketing the product.

de novo pathway

namely in days, the FDA has realized that this process might
become impossible to maintain. Therefore, the FDA started to
consider “a total product lifecycle-based regulatory framework for
these technologies that would allow for modifications to be made
from real-world learning and adaptation, while still ensuring that
the safety and effectiveness of the software as a medical device is
maintained”'’.

To date, the FDA has cleared or approved several medical
devices using “locked” algorithms. They define a “locked”
algorithm as an algorithm that provides the same result each
time the same input is applied to it and does not change.
However, many recent medical devices, especially when AI/ML
based, use algorithms that change and can adapt over time; these
are described by the FDA as adaptive algorithms, for which
current regulatory frameworks were not designed'’. The power of
these Al/ML-based algorithms lies within the ability to continu-
ously learn, where change to the algorithm might only be realized
after the device or software has been distributed for use and could
learn from real-world experience.

An attempt to solve this issue was proposed in the FDA's
proposed regulatory framework from 2019'°, that “elaborates on a
potential approach to premarket review for artificial intelligence
and ML-driven software modifications”’’. It is recognized by the
FDA that these adaptive algorithms require a total product
lifecycle (TPLC) regulatory approach, enabling rapid cycle of
product improvement with effective safeguards.

This TPLC approach is based on the Digital Health Software
Precertification (Pre-Cert) Program"”, allowing for the evaluation of
Software as a Medical Device (SaMD) products throughout the
lifecycle.

However, the FDA does not ask companies to categorize their
technology as AI/ML based when in fact it is. And some companies
mention that their technology is Al/ML based in the announce-
ment of the FDA approval or the specific ML method they used,
but others do not. We witnessed this issue while working on this
paper ourselves.

At this moment, the evaluation of the processes for approval
and implementation is hampered by a lack of clarity on the
approval of Al/ML-based medical devices and algorithms, as FDA
announcements do not clearly state the use of these methods.
Moreover, the search engine of the FDA’s website does not allow
users to perform specific search queries in FDA announcements
and summaries, thus hampering the accessibility of the database.
It can be expected from regulatory bodies to provide a clear
description of such devices; create and maintain a clear database,
allowing proper search queries, to assess the implementation of
new techniques. The FDA, like other regulatory agencies, has not
done any of these yet.

The purpose of this paper therefore was threefold: (1) to
provide an insight into the currently available AlI/ML-based
medical devices and algorithms that have been approved by the

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 118

Regarding the de novo classification, it is used to classify those novel medical devices for which there are no legally
marketed counterparts, but which offer adequate safety and effectiveness with general controls. The FDA performs a risk-
based assessment of the device in question before approval and allowing the device to be marketed.

 

FDA; (2) to create an up-to-date database of FDA approvals in this
field that welcomes submissions and might serve as the database
that the FDA should have; and (3) to raise awareness of the
importance of regulatory bodies clearly stating whether a medical
device is Al/ML based.

In line with this aim, we performed a systematic web-based
search for announcements of FDA approvals of AI/ML-based
medical devices and algorithms and cross-checked all approvals
on FDA.gov resulting in an open access and continuously
expandable database.

To our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive database of
strictly Al/ML-based medical technologies, in all medical special-
ties, that have been approved by the FDA. We also suggest a
threshold and definition of what defines a medical technology as
Al/ML based.

RESULTS
Cross-checked and validated medical devices and algorithms

Cross-checking and validation of all announcements resulted in a
database with 64 AI/ML based, FDA-approved medical devices
and algorithms. We decided to include only those 29 devices in
our further analysis that met the criteria of being considered an Al/
ML-based technology in the related official FDA announcements
(Table 2). For the other 35 devices, online sources other than the
FDA marked them as Al/ML-based technologies. A comprehensive
overview is provided in the online open access database.

A short overview of these medical devices and algorithms can
be found in the infographic (Fig. 1) and a detailed overview, with
subsequent directions to the official FDA announcements, is
provided in the online open access database.

Of these medical devices and algorithms, the vast majority (n =
23, 79.3%) was approved by the FDA with a 510(k) clearance, while
5 (17.2%) received de novo pathway clearance and one (3.4%)
received PMA clearance.

The first FDA approval was granted in the year 2016, with three
approvals at the end of the year 2017. Most FDA approvals were
granted in the year 2018, with 13 (44.8%) approvals, while 10
(34.4%) and 2 (6.9%) approvals were granted in 2019 and 2020 up
until February, respectively.

The two main medical specialties with Al/ML-based medical
innovations are Radiology and Cardiology, with 21 (72.4%) and 4
(13.8%) FDA approved medical devices and algorithms respec-
tively. The remaining medical devices and algorithms can be
grouped as focusing on internal medicine/endocrinology, neurol-
ogy, ophthalmology, emergency medicine, and oncology.

The medical field of radiology is the trendsetter regarding FDA-
approved medical devices and algorithms, with the introduction
of Al/ML-based solutions for worldwide applied image reading
software. Examples are the three algorithms for Arterys Inc.,
Arterys Cardio DL, Arterys Oncology DL and Arterys MICA, which

Seoul National University Bundang Hospital
Np}

S. Benjamens et al.

 

 

uol}eYy0U
BHuluses} daap jaysewaid
ABoyjoinan ABbojoipey OL SLOZ pue Bbuluses; sulydey (H)OLS 6S6L8Ly uoljeyoidua}Ul UleIq JYW AN Xid}e@WOd! ulelqod! 9|
uolzedyI}0U wuyywobye
wuyywobye jaysewaid abe} aHeyowsy
ABojounan ABojoipey OL 8LOZT a2uabyjaqu! jelyny (OLS LLLZ8 LY jeluesdejU! ayndVy ‘PY Iv-OxXeEW xJOIdInay SL
uol}eYy0U
jayseuaid "py] “SD1U01}9a]5
ABojoipsey 60 8L0Z 04-1V (OLS ZEVO8 LY yoddns siskjeue 5534 J]aMase> UaYZUaYs WUOVL|d DIV v1
uol}eYy0U
joxJeWaid IMWW pue [> Uo sisoubelp
ABojo2UuQ ABojoipey 60 8L0Z IV OOLS ve078 Ly 4azued Bun] pue 42A17 ‘Duy SAuayy WOIW sSkuauy €L
uol}eYy0U
luywobye paseq jayseuaid demos
Abojoipey = 8 8LOZ ~OMIeu jeinau daaq (OLS QEETBLY Hulsser01d abew! Abojoipey DU] ‘JeED1IPaW ajqns 1]denqns ZL
uol}eYy0U
jaysewaid Aydeabourwew LTA BeMIYOS
ABojo2UQ Abojoipey ZO 8L0Z Bujwea| daaq (OLS v6616L» RIA Aysuap ysealg ‘ul ‘GVO! IV wPuNno{old LL
uol}eYy0U
SUIDIPSW joxJeWaid sjuaijzed SAISUas
Aduebsawy Abojoipey ZO 8L0Z buiwesa] daaq C)OLS Zv908LM aw Jo sisoubeip pue abeuy ‘P11 ‘Te2!paw Zoply asedjoug OL
Aemujed
ABojours.0puz 90 8LOz IV OAOU 9p EVOOLLNIG = sajeqeip | adj buibeuew = ‘pr] ‘sajaqeiq paweaqd poweaq 6
uol}eYy0U dIEMIYJOS
jaysewaid uolde14 UOIDAaly
ABojoipie> ABbojoipey so 8L0z Huluseay sulydeyy (H)OLS O8ZEZLLY sisAjeue Wuelbolpsed0UdZ ‘Du ‘sqe] Aeg pe}yewoiny GQwoudz 8g
sabueud wuayshs JDaUUOD
ABojoursd0puz €0 8L0Z IV VWWd ZO009Ld = asodnj6H poojq bundipaig DIUOIpPIW) uelpieny) = /
SUIDIPI| Aemujed sisoubeip ‘Du ‘Saibojouysdey
Aduabsawy Abojoipey ZO 8Lo0z Hulusea; dsaqg OAOU ap SOOoOo8 LNId aunyoed SUM Ael-X uabeu| 3918qg0R1sO 9
Aemujed
ABojoinan Abojoipey Z0 8L0Z IV OAOU 9p €ZOOZLNIC 1D YO UON59}98P 24041S IWZIA oewoyd 6S
Aemujed Ayjyedounjas
AbojowjeyiydO 10 8L0Z IV OAOU ap LO008LN4q DNaqelp JO UO!}Da}0q ‘O71 Xal XpPl  v
uol}eYy0U
joxJeWaid uoiesijdde
ABojoouG Abojoipey LL ZLOZ Hulusea; dsaqg (H)OLS ZVSELLY dNsoUubeIp jedIpey;y ‘Duy SAIBUY qq ABojoz.u9 suey og
uol}eYy0U
joxJeWaid
ABojoineN €0 ZLOZ Wy Wobyje peyewoiny (H)OLS LZ9ZILY SAapPsOSIp dasajs Jo sisoubeig ‘Du ‘eyeEqosuy dazjsosuZ.Z
uol}eYy0U YW Wody
jayseuaid sabewl Je;NISeAo!pied
ABojoipie> Abojoipey LL 9LOZ Hulusea; dsaqg (H)OLS €SZTEOLY BulzAjeue aiemyos ‘Duy SAIBUY Jd olpuep shuauy iL
Ayeisods
jed1paw jyUSsWadUNOUUe U! jeaoudde Jaquunu jeaoidde Auedwod wuywobye
Aiepuodas Ayeideds jedipayy ajeq wyobje jo uonuayy Vd4 jo edkKy va UOIdiUDsap Yous juajed jo awey JO DdIADp jo DweN #
‘salbojouY ra} |edI1IPaW pasegq-qW/IV ‘PeAoidde-yq4 67 ay} Jo aseqeieq ‘7 aqey

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 118

Seoul National University Bundang Hospital
S. Benjamens et al.

ABojoouG

ABojoouG

ABojoipey

sulipew
Aduabiawy

ABojoipues

ABojoipey

ABojoipey

ABojoipues

ABojoipey

ABojoipey

ABojoipey

ABojoipey

ABojoipey

LO OCOC

LO OCOC

CL 6LOT

LL 6LOZ

60 6L0Z

80 6LO0C

LO 6L0C

90 6LO0C

y41Omjau
jeinau jednyy
wuyywobye
aduabia}U! |EIYWy

s}UdUOdWOD
Huluseay sulydeyy

suyywobyje paseq
-Buluses} auludeyy

Hulusea; dsaqg

sw wobye
aduabija}U! [EY

Hulusesa] daeq

JOM aU
jeunau jeuoN|nAuoyD

YIOMIAN [eunan

uolzedyI}0U
joxJeWaid
O)OLS
Aemujed
OAOU ap
uolzedyI}0U
joxJeWaid
O)OLS
uolzedyI}0U
joxJeWaid
O)OLS
uolzedyI}0U
joxJeWaid
O)OLS
uolzedyI}0U
joxJeWaid
O)OLS
uolzedyI}0U
joxJeWaid
O)OLS
uolzedyI}0U
joxJeWaid
O)OLS
uolzedyI}0U
joxJeWaid

vOOC6L»

CCOOZLNAC

L8CC6LY

LZLLOLM

89CEB8LY

C8LEBLY

LZTE8Ly

889 L6Ly

JOWUOW Delpse>D

JaUeD JO} SNoIdidsns suolsa|
JO} BIeEMIOS |eDd1HojOIpeY

MOPOM WesiBouwey|

uo!DUNY JejNdseaolpsed
Jo synsai Jo Hursodas
pue uoledyijUeno

Je|nIseaoipsed
- UO!IDNJJsuODaI BHew! [5D

xesoyuJouNnaud
yUauussasse Aey-X 3S9y

Aseuougjnd

- UO!}DNAJsUuODaI BHew! [5D

aJEMYOS

Buissed.0id abew! Abojoipey

DU] SADIAAQq OFF

‘Du ‘syubisuy
BAIVLYUUCNH

‘Ag Jed!paw JUloduaaisS

‘PIT S2IWOIIN

‘DUI “WSN SUOIIN|OS
|ED1IPayy SUaWAIS

‘D711 ‘stuayshs je21paW 4D
‘Du “WSN SsUOrINjOS

J2ED1IDaY\y SUBWAIS

‘Du| ‘[e21payW apqns

uolje10dio>

aieMos siskjeuyy O4F

XUeNH

WLesedsuedy

310 ODN0yrA

(Ae|NDSeAOIPIe>D)
uoluedwos pey-|V

ans aed jeonW>D

(AsJeuOWWINd)
uoluedwos pey-|V

YWehans

(4D!'v) eulbuyZ O/-4ee|D

Seoul National University Bundang Hospital

 

Np)

JeEUO|INjOAUOD daaq (OLS OVOESLY Wy WObje uoNsNpal asiIoN suwWayshs |ed1Ipay) UoUeD yUabl|ja}U] pedueApYy

UO!}eDYI]OU
joxJeWaid

ABojoipey SO 6L0Z a2uabyjaqU jenymy ONOLS
UO!}eDYI]OU

joxJeWaid

buiues] daaq C)OLS

suldipew
Ad uabiawy

xesoyuJouNnaud
yUuauussasse AeYy-X Say

‘p17 UOISIA

C9OEO6LY JEDIPa|A\J CIQSZ XNdyyeeH

UO]NISUODaY
abew) Hbulusea7] daaq

UOI}INIYSUODAI BHew! [> ‘D771 ‘SwiaysAs jed1pay] 4D

ABojoipey v0 6LOZ COCESLY

uol}eYy0U
wuyywobye jaysewaid

A6ojoipey €0 6107 aduabyjjaqu! jeIoyimuy (OLS
uol}eYy0U

joxJeWaid

auldipayy JeUJa}U] LL SLOZ a>uabyjjayU! ;eyny O)OLS

ABojoouG MO[POM WesiBouwey| abel wd

S8cesly Du] ‘XLJEYWanD

uolje1JUBDUOD = *p}] Ald BdIAJaS siskjeuy
UOJ! JAAI] BuNseay| yeaH e2ueuosay

luaysks siskjeuy

8LCC8Ly WeWSIe4

Ayeisods
JeD1Ipaw jUdWa .UNOUUe UI
Aiepuodas Ayeideds jedipayy wy wobyje jo uous

Auedwio>
juased Jo awWeN

jeaoudde Jaquunu jeaoidde
Vdd JO adAL vas

wuywobye

UONdUDsap Wous JO aDdIAaP jo aweN #

 

panuljuo> Z ajqeL

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 118
FDA APPROVALS FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE-BASED

DEVICES IN MEDICINE

Arterys Cardio DL

EnsoSleep |S) diagnosis of sleep disorders
+ Arterys Oncology DL medical diagnostic application
miley ey detection of diabetic retinopathy
is Loa stroke detection on CT

OsteoDetect G X-ray wrist fracture diagnosis
© predicting blood glucose changes
| EchoMD (AEF Software) echocardiogram analysis

Guardian Connect System

Peete] te] © managing Type 1 diabetes.
eee
+ ProFound™ Al Software V2.1 breast density via mammogprahy

+ Arterys MICA

(cs
@
(sy

+ SubtlePET radiology image processing software
t | AI-ECG Platform
aCe! o)(o)b4
icobrain MRI brain interpretation
+) FerriSmart Analysis System Palco ig Mm melas alent (ola)
eae Loe) mammogram workflow
jolt To Tolar dealers eae) ea Tele Ma eela teal)
+ HealthPNX chest X-Ray assessment pneumothorax
+ Advanced Intelligent Clear-IQ Engine noise reduction algorithm
ees iui sg radiology image processing software
+ Al-Rad Companion (Pulmonary) CT image reconstruction - pulmonary
eee RO eB TOL chest X-Ray assessment pneumothorax
+. Al-Rad Companion (Cardiovascular) fea MT lole Ma rela imei nel ge lo) Conta (o lm

+- EchoGo Core

 

TransparaTM mammogram workflow

Oo ogee 22

QuantX

1 | Eko Analysis Software

(OME ah acts otis

triage and diagnosis of time sensitive patients

liver and lung cancer diagnosis on CT and MRI

acute intracranial hemorrhage triage algorithm

quantification and reporting of results of cardiovascular deo

radiological software for lesions suspicious for cancer

 

S. Benjamens et al.

np)

 

TYPE OF FDA APPROVAL
510(K) PREMARKET NOTIFICATION
2? DENOVOPATHWAY

)) PMA

CARDIOLOGY

ENDOCRINOLOGY

RADIOLOGY

SMOe, Othrcrte

> ~*~,

NEUROLOGY

INTERNAL MEDICINE

!
—— is BN eA

OPHTHALMOLOGY

=.

-

EMERGENCY MEDICINE

NNN

UT ae

ONCOLOGY

Fig.1 An infographic about the 29 FDA-approved, Al/ML-based medical technologies. The devices have features such as date and type of
FDA approval; name of the device, its short description and which primary and secondary medical specialty it is related to.

are connected to the workflow Picture Archiving and Commu-
nication Systems from main vendors as Siemens Healthineers AG
(Germany) and GE Healthcare (USA)*~. Six out of these 21
algorithms can be applied in the field of oncology, with three
focusing on mammography analyses (ProFound™ Al Software
V2.1, cmTriage and TransparaTM) and three others on CT-based
lesion detection (Arterys Oncology DL, Arterys MICA and QuantxX).
This is followed by two algorithms focusing on brain image
analyses, with innovations for stroke and hemorrhage detection
(ContaCT, Accipiolx, and icobrain), and six algorithms to improve
image processing, with noise and radiation dosage reduction
(SubtlePET, Deep Learning Image Reconstruction, Advanced
Intelligent Clear-lIQ Engine, SubtleMR, Al-Rad Companion (Pul-
monary) and Al-Rad Companion (Cardiovascular)). Another four
algorithms focusing on acute care, with two algorithms for the
assessment of pneumothorax (HealthPNX and Critical Care Suite),
one focusing on wrist fracture diagnosis (OsteoDetect) and the
Aidoc Medical BriefCase system for triage of head, spine, and chest
injuries. The final two algorithms in this specialty can be applied
for cardiovascular assessments, focusing on the assessment of the
heart ejection fraction (EchoMD AEF Software and EchoGo Core).

Cardiology is another category with major advancements,
resulting in four FDA-approved medical devices and algorithms.
Most investment goes to innovations for the detection of cardiac
rhythm abnormalities, with FDA approval for the AIl-ECG Platform
and Eko Analysis Software. The other two algorithms overlap with
the field of Radiology, being EchoMD AEF software and
EchoGo Core.

With diabetes affecting a significant part of society, innovations
to manage blood glucose levels were highly warranted. The first
steps were made with the introduction of the Guardian Connect
System by Medtronic and the DreaMed Diabetes system (DreaMed
Diabetes Ltd)“’. Al/ML-based interpretation of laboratory results
was also introduced for the field of Internal Medicine, with the
Ferrismart Analysis System (Resonance Health Analysis Service Pty
Ltd) for liver iron concentration assessment.

Seoul National University Bundang Hospital

To increase access to early eye disease detection, one company
introduced an Al/ML-based algorithm for the interpretation of
ophthalmology tests, being Idx (IDx LLC) for detection of diabetic
retinopathy

There are also some devices and algorithms related to
neurology, with broad overlap with the field of Radiology. In
addition to these overlapping algorithms, EnsoSleep was intro-
duced for the diagnosis of sleep disorders.

Additional medical devices and algorithms

For these 35 medical devices, the application of Al/ML has not
been confirmed by the official FDA announcements but by other
online sources.

With the introduction of the BodyGuardian Remote Monitoring
System from Preventice Solutions in 2012, the first FDA-approved
Al/ML-based medical device was introduced*’. This initiated
further investments in innovations for the detection of cardiac
rhythm abnormalities, resulting in 14 medical devices and
algorithms for this purpose. The other two algorithms in this field
focus on the detection of cardiac murmurs (eMurmer ID, CSD Labs
GmbH). Interest from multinational technology companies is
evident, with two FDA-approved algorithms from Apple Inc, being
the ECG App and Apple Irregular Rhythm Notification Feature.

Application of Al/ML-based algorithms for rapid interpretation
of the most general values in medical care, being the vital signs,
was achieved by Excel Medical Electronics, Spry Health and
Current Health. To further assist medical personnel in general,
Stratoscientific, Inc. introduced the Steth IO device to analyse
heart and lung sounds.

With two Al/ML-based algorithms, BrainScope Company Inc. has
introduced Al/ML for the evaluation of brain injuries. At first, this
company introduced Ahead 100, an electroencephalograph-based
algorithm to evaluate patients after a mild traumatic brain injury.
This algorithm was further developed, resulting in the introduction
of BrainScope TBI, an algorithm which can be used for a broader
scope of traumatic brain injuries—from functional abnormality
(concussions) to structural injury (brain bleeds)*". Further attention

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 118
S. Benjamens et al.

 

goes to a gamified neurorehabilitation program, MindMotion GO
(MindMaze SA), which is introduced to support rehabilitation for
the elderly*’. Using motion capture technology and an Al/ML-
based algorithm, this invention promotes functional improve-
ments. Other areas of interest are the assessment of memory loss
in the eldery (Cantab Mobile, Cambridge Cognition Ltd) and
seizure monitoring (Embrace, Empatica Srl.)?°”.

With a high disease burden and a shortage of care providers,
the medical field of psychiatry is in need of AI/ML-based
support~®. Research efforts focus on the diagnosis and stratifica-
tion of psychological disorders, followed by subsequent treat-
ment support strategies. Two of these Al/ML-based algorithms
reached the stage of FDA approval, QbCheck (QbTech AB) and
ReSET-O (Pear Therapeutics Inc.). With QbCheck, healthcare
workers can substantiate their diagnosis or rule out attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), enhancing objective
medical decisions in psychiatry’, whereas ReSET-O can be
applied for patients with Opioid Use Disorder, providing cognitive
behavioral therapy as a mobile medical application for prescrip-
tion use only. As a next step, the ReSET-O algorithm will be used
in a randomized controlled trial, which is scheduled to start this
year (April, 2020)°°.

DISCUSSION

In the beginning of the AI/ML era, it is especially important for the
medical and scientific community to have a clear understanding
of what medical technologies are considered Al/ML based and
which ones are regulated to see how those can become elements
of the toolset of medical professionals. Our database shows that it
is possible to define the threshold for categorizing a technology as
Al/ML based and also, that there is a need from regulatory
agencies to create their own databases.

Authors of this study hope that this database can serve as a
basis for the databases regulatory bodies will launch and the
definition of threshold they will publish.

There are limitations to our approach. We aimed at determining
the state of Al/ML-based medical devices and were met with three
initial obstacles. (1) We chose to look only at regulated devices as
companies tend to overhype the importance of their technology
or simply use the terms Al and ML for the sake of more
investments. (2) We chose to look at FDA approvals as the FDA has
shown leadership in regulating Al/ML-based medical technologies
and has published policies about that. And (3) we had to
determine what should be considered as an Al/ML-based medical
technology based on claims made in publicly available informa-
tion sources.

While we aim to maintain the database along with contribu-
tions from the scientific community, the primary aim of the project
is to encourage the FDA and other regulatory bodies to provide a
clear overview of approved Al/ML-based medical devices and
algorithms.

These obstacles also describe the possible limitations of our
approach. First, not all Al/ML-based medical devices have been
approved by the FDA, therefore we had to exclude many
unregulated technologies from the database. Second, there are
numerous Al/ML-based medical devices and algorithms in other
countries outside the scope and supervision of the FDA. And third,
as the FDA does not maintain such a database, we had to set the
threshold for assessing what technology should be considered as
Al based. It is possible that the terms and expressions we looked
for could be too narrow for assessing Al/ML-based technologies.

While the scope of solving these issues exceeded our capacity,
we believe that this paper represents the results of a pioneering
work. No other curated database of FDA approvals of Al/ML-based
devices and algorithms that serve medical purposes exists. As
such solutions become increasingly adapted in the healthcare

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 118

setting, the importance of such an easily accessible database will
become more apparent.

While we aim to maintain the database along with contribu-
tions from the scientific community, we encourage the FDA and
other regulatory bodies to take over this database or launch their
own. The EMA already provides guidelines and statements about
Al and would benefit from the addition of such a repository. This
will help those local and international institutions and the public
as the use of Al/ML-based medical technologies in healthcare has
become imminent.

The FDA, which is the very source of these approvals, possesses
the necessary resources required to perform in-depth analysis
regarding the credibility and accuracy of algorithms for medical
purposes. Especially, having access to the background database of
their search engine where the content of FDA approval summaries
is available.

Also, regulatory bodies could establish a clearer definition of
what falls under the terms Al and ML This would also make it
easier for developers, companies, researchers, journalists, and the
general public to determine whether an approved technology is in
fact Al/ML based.

We aimed at providing a method and a model for achieving
that.

On top of the rise in Al/ML-based algorithms, reports show a
comparable increase in the global market size for AI/ML in
healthcare. The value is projected to soon exceed US$28 billion
from its 1 billion value in 2016°'. Software and devices using the
technology will inevitably contribute to this market share.

However, despite the increasingly available Al/ML-based
medical solutions on the market, there remains the factor of
adopting those very solutions. The challenge to adopting these in
the medical practice can be attributed to hindrances due to
regulatory frameworks and trust issues with new technologies
from both the physicians and patients side>.

There needs to be a paradigm shift when implementing new
technologies, including Al/ML-based ones, in the healthcare
system and key regulators play a crucial role in this as stated in
the previous section.

According to our findings, there were no Al/ML-based devices
approved by the FDA in 2010 and 2011. In the year 2012, we
identified two while in 2019 alone, there were 22, amounting the
number of relevant software programs to 64. In a decade, there
was a major increase in the amount of these technologies.

As new approvals of Al/ML-based medical technologies become
available, it will become even more difficult to keep track of all
relevant announcements. This open access database that we set
up and will continuously maintain could help serve as a reference
for interested parties working on similar software or for research
purposes; and as such will hopefully be a useful tool for the
medical and scientific community.

METHODS

Reasoning for not being able to do searches thoroughly
on fda.gov

The most obvious method for our research would have been to check the
official FDA database on FDA.gov and look for Al/ML-related terms in the
summaries or approvals. The FDA’s official website does feature a search
engine option, making all of its announcements freely accessible. However,
searches cannot be filtered according to their content such as approval
announcements or specific words. Looking for Al/ML-related terms in this
way is not possible on the FDA's search engine.

The FDA also provides reports of approvals in the 510(k), PMA and de
novo categories on a monthly basis, but these provide basic information
about the device or software approved and its company, with no mention
of its function®’.

In the next section, we outline the search strategy we chose to use that
still ensures that all items in the database are cross-checked but could also
mean that the database might not be complete. While not ideal, this issue

Seoul National University Bundang Hospital
Identification

Screening

Tet oda

Included

 

Fig. 2. Flowchart for the selection of Al/ML-based algorithms for this
online database, including the number of identified webpages, the
number of screened announcements, the number of eligible devices
and algorithms, and the final number of included Al/ML-based
devices and algorithms.

also underscores the notion that the FDA’s website could improve its
search function with a filter feature so as to provide more streamlined
results. Moreover, given that the database we built is open to submissions,
we hope to make it as complete and as comprehensive as possible.

Search strategy employed for the database

For our search, we used a search strategy with the following steps: first,
reliable resources, where FDA announcements appear regularly, were
selected; second, these resources were used to identify relevant
announcements; third, all identified announcements were cross-checked
in the search engine of fda.gov.

Announcements from the websites listed were prioritized, scrutinized for
relevant ones and then cross-checked on the FDA’s website for the official
approval: mobihealthnews.com; bmj.com; medscape.com; lancet.com;
sciencedaily.com; radiologybusiness.com; and acrdsi.org. In the announce-
ments, we had to focus on key words that would point to the use of Al/ML
in a medically oriented device or software that has been approved by the
FDA (Fig. 2).

As the FDA does not have a threshold for marking devices as Al/ML-
based, our observations showed that the most logical way to determine if
a software program or device can be considered as AI/ML based is if the
official FDA announcement contains any of these expressions: “machine
learning”, “deep learning”, “deep neural networks”, “artificial intelligence”,
and/or “Al.” Taking this into consideration, we used the following search
strategy: (“FDA approval” OR “FDA clearance” OR “Approved by the FDA”)
AND “Machine learning” OR “Deep learning” OR “Deep neural networks”
OR “artificial intelligence” OR “Al”).

Nevertheless, we found that not all announcements use these terms
even if the underlying algorithm can be defined as Al/ML based. For
example, when looking for a specific device like AliveCor Inc.’s Kardia, the
FDA announcement does not mention any of the expressions we looked
for, while the company elsewhere states that their device uses an Al/ML-
based algorithm**. We decided to include these devices and algorithms as
well, although we clearly marked in the database that the related FDA
announcements do not contain any of the expressions we looked for.
Instead, we included those not FDA-related announcements with a URL
that did.

We performed search queries for the time period between the 1st of
January 2010 and the 1st of March 2020. As Al/ML-based technologies in
medicine started gaining attention in the mid-2010s, we chose a longer
time period to avoid missing important announcements. Once a relevant
software program or product was identified from one of those websites, its
authenticity was verified on fda.gov and recorded in our database with the
accompanying FDA approval number.

We also extended our searches to other websites to ensure that we did
not miss any announcements, but the majority came from the above-
mentioned resources. Moreover, every single announcement recorded in
our database was reviewed independently by the other authors of
this paper.

Seoul National University Bundang Hospital

S. Benjamens et al.

Np}

 

Online database and submission of new announcements

Following our collective input, cross-checking and validations, we created
an online database to aggregate the results under the URL https://
medicalfuturist.com/fda-approved-ai-based-algorithms/. This open access
database will be regularly updated by the authors as the FDA approves
new AI/ML-based devices and software.

The database includes the following details for each approval: name of
the device or algorithm; name of the company; short description; FDA
approval number; type of FDA approval; mention of AI/ML in the
announcement, if no mention of AI/ML in FDA announcement (URL); date
of approval; medical specialty it is related to; secondary medical specialty it
is related to.

Due to the nature of the search strategy we chose to use, it is possible
that we have missed some announcements. Therefore, we added a
submission feature on the database, allowing the community to submit
new ones that have been released after our search concluded or even
those that we might have missed during our initial search. All community
submissions will be cross-checked and verified before being considered to
be added to the database.

The infographic

In order to provide a clear picture about the state of Al/ML based, FDA-
approved medical devices and algorithms; demonstrate which medical
specialties those are related to, and how their number has been rising
since 2010, we put all the cross-checked and verified devices in an
infographic.

The infographic contains a device’s name, its short description, its
relation to a primary and a secondary medical specialty and what kind of
FDA approval it received. The same colors are assigned to the same
medical specialty.

Reporting summary

Further information on experimental design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the findings of this study are available on https://
medicalfuturist.com/fda-approved-ai-based-algorithms.

Received: 28 March 2020; Accepted: 13 August 2020;
Published online: 11 September 2020

REFERENCES

1. Matheny, M. E., Whicher, D. & Thadaney Israni, S. Artificial intelligence in health
care: a report from the National Academy of Medicine. JAMA 323, 509-510,
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2019.21579 (2020).

2. Wang, X. et al. Chest X-ray: hospital-scale chest X-ray database and bench-
marks on weakly supervised classification and localization of common thorax
diseases. In: Advances in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Springer
(2019).

3. Patel, N. M. Enhancing Next-generation sequencing-guided cancer care through
cognitive computing. Oncologisty 23, 179-185, https://doi.org/10.1634/
theoncologist.2017-0170 (2018).

4. Brown, J. M. et al. Automated diagnosis of plus disease in retinopathy of pre-
maturity using deep convolutional neural networks. JAMA Ophthalmol. 136,
803-810, https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2018.1934 (2018).

5. Horng S., et alCreating an automated trigger for sepsis clinical decision support at
emergency department triage using machine learning. PLoS ONE (2017).

6. Wang, T. Outpatient clinic process enhancement at children’s hospital:
empoweredby information technology. Chin. J. Hosp. Adm. 34, 753-755 (2018).
http://wprim.whocc.org.cn/admin/article/articleDetail?WPRIMID=712592
&articleld=7 13077.

7. Labovitz, D. L, Shafner, L, Reyes Gil, M, Virmani, D. & Hanina, A. Using artificia-
lintelligence to reduce the risk of nonadherence in patients on anticoagulationtherapy.
Stroke 48, 1416-1419, https://doi.org/10.1161/STROKEAHA.116.016281 (2017).

8. Forlenza, G. P. Use of artificial intelligence to improve diabetes outcomes in
patients using multiple daily injections therapy. Diabetes Technol. Ther. 21(S2), S2-
4-S2-8, https://doi.org/10.1089/dia.2019.0077 (2019).

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 118
Np)

S. Benjamens et al.

 

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

. Sheth, D. & Giger, M. L. Artificial intelligence in the interpretation of breast cancer on

MARI. J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 51, 1310-1324, https://doi.org/10.1002/jmri.26878 (2019).
Topol, E. J. High-performance medicine: the convergence of human and artificial
intelligence. Nat. Med. 25, 44-56, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-018-0300-7 (2019).
Hinton, G. Deep learning-a technology with the potential to transform health care. J.
Am. Med. Assoc. 320, 1101-1102, https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2018.11100 (2018).
Stead, W. Clinical implications and challenges of artificial intelligence and deep
learning. JAMA. 320, 1107-1108, https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2018.11029 (2018).
FDA. Proposed regulatory framework for modifications to artificial intelligence/
machine learning (ai/ml)-based Software as a Medical Device (SaMD). Discussion
Paper and Request for Feedback. https://www.regulations.gov/document?D=FDA-
2019-N-1185-0001 (2019).

FDA. Premarket Notification 510(k). https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/
premarket-submissions/premarket-notification-510k (2020).

FDA. Premarket Approval (PMA). https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/premarket-
submissions/premarket-approval-pma (2019).

FDA. De Novo Classification Request https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/
premarket-submissions/de-novo-classification-request (2019).

FDA. How is the FDA Considering Regulation of Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning Medical Devices? https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/software-
medical-device-samd/artificial-intelligence-and-machine-learning-software-
medical-device#regulation (2020).

FDA. How is the FDA Considering Regulation of Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning Medical Devices? https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/software-
medical-device-samd/artificial-intelligence-and-machine-learning-software-
medical-device (2020).

FDA. Developing a Software Precertification Program. https://www.fda.gov/media/
119722/download (2019).

Retson, T. A., Besser, A. H., Sall, S., Golden, D. & Hsiao, A. Machine learning and
deep neural networks in thoracic and cardiovascular imaging. J. Thorac. Imaging
34, 192-201, https://doi.org/10.1097/RTI.0000000000000385 (2019).

Abraham, S. B. et al. Improved real-world glycemic control with continuous
glucose monitoring system predictive alerts. J Diabetes Sci. Technol.
1932296819859334, https://doi.org/10.1177/1932296819859334 (2019).

van der Heijden, A. A. et al. Validation of automated screening for referable
diabetic retinopathy with the IDx-DR device in the Hoorn Diabetes Care System.
Acta Ophthalmol. 96, 63-68, https://doi.org/10.1111/aos.13613 (2018).
Castelletti, S. et al. A wearable remote monitoring system for the identification of
subjects with a prolonged QT interval or at risk for drug-induced long QT syndrome.
Int. J. Cardiol 266, 89-94, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iicard.2018.03.097 (2018).

Hanley, D. A brain electrical activity electroencephalographic-based biomarker of
functional impairment in traumatic brain injury: a multi-site validation trial. J.
Neurotrauma 35, 41-47, https://doi.org/10.1089/neu.2017.5004 (2018).
Perez-Marcos, D., Bieler-Aeschlimann, M. & Bieler-Aeschlimann, A. Virtual reality
as a vehicle to empower motor-cognitive neurorehabilitation. Front. Psychol. 9,
2120, https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02120 (2018).

Cormack, F. et al. Wearable technology for high-frequency cognitive and mood
assessment in major depressive disorder: longitudinal observational study. J.
Med. Internet Res. 6, €12814, https://doi.org/10.2196/12814 (2019).

Regalia, G. Onorati, F., Lai, M., Caborni, C. & Picard, R. W. Multimodal wrist-worn
devices for seizure detection and advancing research: focus on the Empatica wrist-
bands. Epilepsy Res 153, 79-82, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2019.02.007 (2019).
Doraiswamy, P. M., Blease, C. & Bodner, K. Artificial intelligence and the future of
psychiatry: Insights from a global physician survey. Artif. Intell. Med. 102, 101753,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artmed.2019.101753 (2020).

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 118

29. Ulberstad, F. et al. Objective measurement of attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder symptoms outside the clinic using the QbCheck: Reliability and validity.
Int. J. Methods Psychiatr. Res. n/a(n/a):e1822. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1002/mpr.1822 (2020).

30. reSET-O RCT (Randomized Controlled Trial). https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT04129580 (2020).

31. Mikulic, M. Global Market Size for Artificial intelligence in Healthcare in 2016, 2017
and a Forecast for 2025. https://www.statista.com/statistics/826993/health-ai-
market-value-worldwide/ (2020).

32. Kuan, R. Adopting Al in Health Care Will Be Slow and Difficult. Harvard Business Review.
https://hbr.org/201 9/1 0/adopting-ai-in-health-care-will-be-slow-and-difficult (2019).

33. FDA. 5170(k) Devices Cleared in 2020. https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/510k-
clearances/510k-devices-cleared-2020 (2020).

34. Mincholé A. & Rodriguez, B. Artificial intelligence for the electrocardiogram. Nat.
Med. 22-23, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-018-0306-1 (2019).

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
B.M., S.B., and P.D. designed the study and wrote the paper.

COMPETING INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing interests.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
$41746-020-00324-0.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to B.M.

Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons

ig Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.

© The Author(s) 2020

Seoul National University Bundang Hospital
