International Journal of Information Management 55 (2020) 102184

 

=

International if Journal of
Information
4 Management

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

International Journal of Information Management

   

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijinfomgt

 

Opinion Paper

The role of IS in the covid-19 pandemic: A liquid-modern perspective

Check for
updates

 

Ronan Doyle*, Kieran Conboy

Lero — The Irish Software Research Centre & National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland

 

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

 

 

Keywords: History shows that pandemics can catalyse enormous change, fundamentally transforming the way people make
Change sense of the world. Technologies can also be catalysts of change. While digital technologies are playing a vital
Covid-19

role in tackling the covid-19 pandemic, the pandemic also presents a significant opportunity for digital tech-
nologies. Some experts believe the pandemic may permanently normalise the comprehensive societal use of
digital technologies. This article casts a critical eye over the potential implications of this opportunity in the
context of information systems (IS) research and development. We introduce and outline selected principles of
Zygmunt Bauman’s theory of liquid modernity. We then apply the liquid-modern principles to illustrative ex-
amples drawn from the covid-19 literature by focussing on three areas of established information systems in-
terest: control, big data and information privacy. We show that traditional conceptualisations of scientific and
societal order and control need to be reassessed; that big data alone cannot order clear and safe paths out of the
current crisis and that information privacy regulations are irrelevant when undermined or circumvented by
public and private actors. We conclude by making four recommendations for IS pandemic researchers and five
practical recommendations in the context of the pandemic.

Liquid modernity
Information systems
Order

 

1. Introduction: the pandemic, technology and the future

Technology is playing a vital role in tackling the covid-19 pandemic.
Technologies are enhancing diagnoses of covid-19, shaping spatio-
temporal visualisations of virus transmission (Ting, Carin, Dzau, &
Wong, 2020; Zhou et al., 2020), providing real-time information up-
dates (e.g.: www.worldometers.info/coronavirus) and facilitating per-
sonal, communal, administrative and professional communication
during lockdown (Chen, Lerman, & Ferrara, 2020). The pandemic also
presents ‘a great opportunity for digital technology’ (Ting et al., 2020;
our italics) and may ‘permanently normalise the use of digital tech-
nologies for socialising, business, education, healthcare, religious
worship and government’ (Griffin & Denholm, 2020). Consulting firm
McKinsey & Company phrase it thus: ‘As physical doors close, new di-
gital doors swing open’ (McKinsey1, May 2020). The overarching ob-
jective of this article is to critically examine the future multi-level im-
plications entangled with this opportunity beneath a liquid-modern
lens.

The covid-19 pandemic is a complex, intensified, unpredictable in-
stance of change. Agile theorisations (Conboy, 2009) or forms of
complexity theory (Guo, Vogel, Zhou, Zhang, & Chen, 2009; Hung & Tu,

* Corresponding author.

2014) are undermined by methodological objectives that aim to handle,
tame, steer or otherwise order change (Benbya, Nan, Tanriverdi, & Yoo,
2020; McKelvey, 2004; Sekara, Stopczynski, & Lehmann, 2016). These
concepts may well be too rigid for the present conditions. A core pre-
mise of Zygmunt Bauman’s theory of liquid modernity (Bauman, 2000,
2004, 2007, 2011") is that change cannot be rationalised (Sheptycki,
2017) ordered or controlled. Theories and concepts based on an ability
to do so are fundamentally flawed.

Our review of emergent pandemic-related literature in the IS and
popular domains suggests that the pandemic is relevant to almost every
strand and sub-strand of the IS discipline. We argue that three strands
are of particular relevance:

e Control (Maruping, Viswanath, & Agarwal, 2009): Control in this
article will refer both to the predominating epistemologies under-
pinning IS research, as well as IS research objectives themselves, and
to political and organisational measures that aim to mitigate and
control the impacts of the pandemic. For example, a research ob-
jective for controlling pandemic fake news (Depoux et al., 2020) is
shown to be entangled with socio-political tensions and fundamen-
tally misguided from the liquid-modern perspective (see subsection

E-mail addresses: r.doyle28@nuigalway.ie (R. Doyle), kieran.conboy@nuigalway.ie (K. Conboy).
' The liquid-modern texts cited here are representative, not exhaustive. Bauman published prolifically in an academic and writing career spanning seven decades

(Palmer, Brzezinski, Campbell, 2020).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.102184
Received 15 June 2020; Accepted 15 June 2020
Available online 17 July 2020

0268-4012/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license

(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
R. Doyle and K. Conboy

3.8).

e Big data (Abbasi, Sarker, & Chiang, 2016; Agarwal & Dhar, 2014):
The epistemological and practical implications of big data will be
examined in the context of the pandemic. The holistic efficacy of
automated diagnostic systems (Alimadadi et al., 2020), for example,
must be established in the context of big data itself being in-
trinsically erratic (see subsection 3.3) and not in isolation from the
human beings that the systems are diagnosing (see subsections 3.4
and 4.2.4).

e Information privacy (Bélanger & Crossler, 2011; Smith, Dinev &
Xu, 2011): Information privacy concerns will be examined in the
context of the pandemic. For example, privacy concerns can seem
irrelevant when regulations are now so fluidly circumvented (see
subsections 3.5 and 4.2.1).

References to technology in Section 3 of this article will refer the
reader to one or more of these areas.

We need to assess how technologies are helping the pandemic re-
sponse. Perhaps more importantly, we will need to assess how they
could have helped more. We argue that this analysis should not be
conducted using theories built for a pre-covid-19 way of thinking.
Liquid modernity, characterised by uncertainty and turbulence, is a
theory built for this analysis. Section 2 of the article introduces the
theory of liquid modernity (Bauman, 2000) and briefly outlines a se-
lection of liquid-modern principles. Section 3 applies those principles to
illustrative examples primarily selected from the covid-19-related aca-
demic and popular literature. In this way, subsection 3.1 is informed by
subsection 2.1, subsection 3.2 by 2.2 and so on. Section 4 subsequently
makes four research recommendations and five practical re-
commendations in the context of the pandemic response.

2. The liquid-modern world: uncertain, unstable and unfair

‘Nothing is built on stone; all is built on sand, but we must build as if the
sand were stone.’

—Jorge Luis Borges, ‘The Book of Sand’(Borges, 1975)

Ten liquid-modern principles (Doyle & Conboy, 2020) are now se-
lected, sequentially presented and briefly outlined for consideration in
the context of information systems research and development.

2.1. Technological innovation initiates and supports liquid modernity

The volatile conditions of liquid modernity are initiated by tech-
nological innovation through the modernising processes of order-
building, economic progress and globalisation (Bauman, 2004). Initially
facilitating the increased speed and organisation of innovation, our
computerised, networked era not only emerges with liquid modernity, it
is now a driving force of liquid modernity. The point is not to challenge
technological innovation per se but ‘the capitalist organisation of mo-
bility’ through ‘digital capitalism’ (Fuchs, 2017).

2.2. Dominant modernist epistemologies must be reassessed and updated

At the mutable core of liquid-modern theory are the epistemological
and ethical impacts of complex, postmodern change as it relates to our
modernist, human need for rationalistic order and control. In the pre-
ceding ‘solid’ phase of modernity (Bauman, 2000), change was habi-
tually seen to facilitate a grander design, as if change was but a tem-
porary detour to the same collective destination. In liquid modernity
change is effectively our only permanence (Bauman, 2011), critically
undermining our theoretical and practical conceptualisations of desti-
nation - and objective - altogether.

International Journal of Information Management 55 (2020) 102184

2.3. All solid objectives are necessarily undermined by liquid conditions

The multi-level maximising of readiness for mobile adaption, irre-
spective of the ability to do so, best meets the liquid-modern criteria for
“success” and simultaneously creates its ‘aqueous foundations’ (Lee,
2005). Liquid modernity prioritises mobility over rootedness, flexibility
over rigidity, adaptability over endurance, ephemerality over durability
and responsiveness over restraint. Innovation creates the liquid space
for further innovation, while concomitantly downgrading or rejecting
the original theory, structure, objective, technology or person. How-
ever, we remain solidly predisposed to the imposition of order and
control upon conditions that are now necessarily liquid and mutable.

2.4. Uncontrollable time produces ethical adiaphorization

The past and the future hold little meaning in the context of un-
relenting mutability. In liquid modernity time is effectively unrestricted
and can no longer be unilaterally disciplined, enclosed, divided and
controlled as it was in solid modernity (Till, 2011). Ethical adiaphor-
ization occurs when the past and the future are sacrificed to the de-
mands of the present (Campbell, 2013) and ‘systems and processes
become split off from any consideration of morality’ (Bauman & Lyon,
2013).

2.5. Exterritorial power resists regulation and reinforces inequalities

Power in liquid modernity is separated from political agency and
exists primarily in the exterritoriality of electronic networks, where it
can be transferred, manipulated or undermined instantaneously
(Bauman, 2000). The exterritorial power principle highlights how
regulations and guidelines are habitually circumvented. Liquid mod-
ernity’s most immobile are trapped not only by the limits imposed by
provided technologies but by broader, entangled institutional factors
that can constrain opportunity (Andrade & Urquhart, 2012).

2.6. Private individualism undermines public agency and citizenship

The traditional public space is contracted and delegitimised by the
agency of fragmented, inward-oriented liquid-modern individuals
(Bauman, 2000). No aspect of citizenship can now be taken for granted
(Ellison, 2013). The privatisation of liquid-modern individualism will
not reliably support coherence or synchronicity. A liquid-modern lens
can expose the unintended human disconnections and the erosion of
mutual interest now intensified by sociotechnical integrations.

2.7. Emancipated identity is commodified, requiring perpetual
reconstruction

With societal members engaged as consumers, not producers, con-
sumptive freedom promotes self-construction of identity that must be
solid enough for effective identification but liquid enough to allow for
continual re-construction. Increased freedom is not a simple result of
this ‘paradigm shift’ (Baldwin & Von Hippel, 2020). Should the up-
graded identity not satisfy individual expectations there is now no one
to blame but the individual self. The results are counterproductive
homophilisation, hyper-competitiveness, uncertainty (see subsection
2.8) and further human division.

2.8. Uncertainty is generated and required in liquid modernity

Instability creates the conditions for innovation; innovation creates
uncertainty; uncertainty creates instability. Continual technological
upgrades are associated with an endemic feeling of insecurity
(Sheptycki, 2017). This is precisely the state that liquid modernity re-
quires. Mitigating uncertainty by solidifying individual options coun-
ters the liquid-modern instinct by restricting both freedom and the
R. Doyle and K. Conboy

space for innovation. Uncertainty, rather than being dominated or
controlled, steered or tamed, must now be absorbed, lived with and
even manipulated.

2.9. Liquid modernity creates paradoxical conditions

The paradoxical device reveals problematic elements in logical
reasoning (Dietrich, 2020). Hence, the solution to intensified techno-
logical complexity is enhanced technological innovation (Davis, 2013)
and the paradoxical ‘Frame Problem’ (Dennett, 1978; Fodor, 1987;
McCarthy & Hayes, 1969) is both an intractable philosophical dilemma
and one that scientists can continue to work around (Dietrich, 2020).
The paradoxical principle can reveal emergent tensions and sensitise IS
researchers, developers and practitioners to the fact that technological
solutions are not always the cure for conditions that technologies have
helped to create and intensify (Davis, 2013).

2.10. Uneven liquid differentiation generates wicked problems

Degrees of solidity and liquidity are best conceived as being inter-
locked within the modernising processes of order-building, economic
progress and globalisation, with liquidity now continually undermining
solidity. The stage of modern development within an organisation,
sector or region can characterise the degree of solidity and liquidity.
Modernising, capitalist-motivated, technocentric IS efforts to solidly
order, control and manage are in continual tension with the complex,
fluctuating and liquidly differentiated (Turner, 2003) end-user sites for
their systems and technologies.

3. A liquid-modern perspective of the covid-19 pandemic

The liquid-modern principles briefly outlined in Section 2 will in-
form the perspective applied to the covid-19-related academic and
popular literature cited in each of the following subsections. References
to technology will refer to control, big data and information privacy
(see Section 1).

3.1. Technological innovation initiates and supports liquid modernity

Economic progress is facilitated by technologies during the pandemic.
ICTs facilitate the transition from office-work to work-in-the-home.
Social media enable communication during lockdown (Chen et al.,
2020). Video conferencing app Zoom, with 10 million ‘daily meeting
participants’ in December 2019, reports 300 million daily participants
in May 2020 (theverge.com). Financial institutions that invested
heavily in digitisation following the 2007-2008 financial crisis have the
infrastructures in place to maintain flows of capital and append new
clients (Arner et al., 2020). The Economist, referencing British electrical
power cuts and television stations shutting down early during the 1970s
miners’ strike, captures the present contrast succinctly: ‘The pandemic
has not turned the lights off (The Economist1l, 2020).

Neither has the pandemic ‘killed globalisation’ (The Economist2,
2020). The global economy faces the worst recession since the Great
Depression (World Economic Outlook, 2020) but between 18 March
2020 and 19 May 2020 the combined wealth of the top five US billio-
naires increases by 19 % and the combined wealth of Amazon CEO Jeff
Bezos and Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg increases by 14 %
(Americans for Tax Fairness, 2020). The wheels of ‘software capitalism’
(Bauman, 2000) continue to turn during lockdown: ‘the very richest of
the tech billionaires... dominate the highest ranks of the [Forbes] list.
Nine of the twenty wealthiest people in the world are tech tycoons’
(Forbes1, March 2020).

Order-building is evident in the global aggregation of covid-19 big
data. One study employs the ‘Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count’ tool to
extract content from social media posts ‘because the words and lin-
guistic patterns people use in their text could reveal their emotions,

International Journal of Information Management 55 (2020) 102184

perceptions, and their needs for affiliation, power, achievement, and so
on’ (Li et al., 2020). The research motivation is cited verbatim, not only
because each liquid-modern principle subsequently presented could
challenge the motivation, but because the general application of ma-
chine learning to social media content for the purposes of ‘extracting
relevant entities, their semantic relationship as well as the emotional
sentiment they express’ (Del Vicario, Zollo, Caldarelli, Scala, &
Quattrociocchi, 2017) is order-building science that may well upgrade
the technological artefact more than its social object. We now trust
meta-data but not meta-theories (Anderson, 2008); we prioritise ma-
chine learning over human comprehension. During the pandemic we
must prioritise people, not technology (Klein, 2020). Utopian visions of
global village sociotechnical interconnection are undermined by their
technocentric ontology, as well as capitalist ideals, which generalise
and isolate the experience of individual people and places: ‘Most hos-
pitals are overcrowded, nearing collapse, while medications, mechan-
ical ventilators, oxygen, and personal protective equipment are not
available... We have been in quarantine since March 10. Unfortunately,
the outside world seems unaware that in Bergamo, this outbreak is out of
control (Nacoti et al., 21 March 2020; our italics).

3.2. Dominant modernist epistemologies must be reassessed and updated

The pandemic is a crisis situation where the speed of response is
justifiably vital. It may also be the catalyst for ‘an even faster adoption of
activities relying on digital’ (Arner et al., 2020; our italics). For ex-
ample, ‘the scale of the change and the speed at which it is happening is
shining a bright light on the fact that companies are facing a once-in-a-
generation shift’ (McKinsey1, May 2020). It is, however, the intense
focus of that light —- and its comprehensible identification of a singular
catalyst — that presently concentrates the collective attention on a rate
of change that was in untameable liquid flow long before the light was
switched on. What is increasingly evident is that people are more
conditioned to change than perhaps was realised. Early empirical evi-
dence shows that 78 % of 7,241 island-of-Ireland-based surveyed
workers who never worked remotely before the crisis began — and 83 %
in total —- would like to continue working remotely when the crisis is
over (McCarthy, Ahearne, Bohle Carbonell, O Siochain, & Frost, 2020).
How quickly people have adapted to lockdown is not ‘remarkable’ (The
Economist1, May 2020); people, unconsciously or otherwise, have been
habituated to change, not least through rapid technological innovation.

Our habituation to change is undermined by our modern inclination
to order and control. Pandemic control measures can be undermined by
the very criteria used to define the measure. Inherently mutable covid-
19 case definitions (Bedford et al., 2020; (Tsang et al., 2020) frequently
reorder the course of action demanded of the people the definitions are
designed to protect. Similarly, the common practice of ordering pan-
demic priorities is not necessarily desirable because ‘changing condi-
tions lead to changing priorities’ (Williams & Dawson, 2020). Im-
plementation of control measures to combat virus spread are defined
and imposed on a nation-by-nation basis (Nanni et al., 2020). Sweden
is, arguably, the most prominent example of the “liquid” control ap-
proach (Qi, Karlsson, Sallmen, & Wyss, 2020), with China, arguably, the
most prominent “solid” controller. In fluctuating, wicked environments
both solid and liquid control strategies present complex problems. De-
centralised,liquid control measures (Nanni et al., 2020) increase in-
stability (see 3.3). Centralised control approaches (Li et al., 2020) are
fraught with ethical risk (see 3.5). In the associated context of big data,
decision-makers must remember that the data is but a narrowed, solid
snapshot of a wider, liquid process, with the data itself momentarily
shaped not only by the technology, but by the data ontology employed
and its regulatory environment (Kitchin, 2014). The Surgisphere covid-
19 big data scandal is a case in point (Piller, 2020; see 4.1.2). In this
light, the indeterminate global spread of technologies might be un-
flatteringly compared to the untamed spread of a virus. Our over-
arching efforts to control the multi-level, wicked and mutable impacts of
R. Doyle and K. Conboy

technological spread can now seem epistemologically, as well as prac-
tically, outdated.

3.3. All solid objectives are necessarily undermined by liquid conditions

Pandemic control measures spark multiple national and interna-
tional debates around, for example, the necessity of lockdowns, the
duration of lockdowns, the timing of lockdowns, the efficacy of specific
drugs, the benefits or otherwise of facemask and glove-wearing and the
precise distance for social distancing. Technologies can now in-
stantaneously connect these sparks, creating fires, or viral online
stories. In the case of covid-19, fake news is seen to spread faster than
the virus itself (Depoux et al., 2020; see 3.8). The liquid-modern mo-
bility of information undermines institutional efforts to stabilise public
understanding during the pandemic.

In the context of big data, some experts are proposing the in-
tegrated, centralised and global collection of covid-19 patient and ci-
tizen big data (Alimadadi et al., 2020; Depoux et al., 2020). Solid,
centralised, big data patterns are inevitably undermined by the con-
tinuous, mutable flow of the data itself; by small, liquid input errors
that can result in magnified research inaccuracies and implementations
(iIenca & Vayena, 2020) and by scientific and jurisdictional differences
that must either be homogenised, creating anaemic, untrustworthy data
pictures, or will require the order-creating and counterproductive
origin-categorisation of the continuously incoming data. What will be
undermined by automated diagnostic systems (Alimadadi et al., 2020)?
Society, and science for that matter, can simply not provide a coherent,
multi-level big data snapshot of itself. There is no simple solution for
stakeholders. Deepening human concerns about the ‘robustness of
fundamental digital infrastructures’ (Arner et al., 2020) ignore the fact
that the digital infrastructure must never be too robust if it is to support
continual innovation. Robustness is a feature of solidity, not liquidity.

In the contexts of information privacy and control, there are calls for
the European Commission to mitigate concerns of social control by is-
suing legislative commitments to delete any collected data at the end of
the crisis (Knight, 2020). The European Commission should act in a
centralised manner because, it is suggested, legislative measures de-
veloped nationally by individual member states could ‘ultimately
compromise the fragile Schengen area’ (Barbieri & Darnis, 2020). A
solid, traditionally sound, centralising proposal, which fails to recognise
that the Schengen area now necessarily depends upon its fragility to
foster innovation and maximise globalised potentiality and economic
progress.

3.4. Uncontrollable time produces ethical adiaphorization

The spread of the virus, incubation periods, self-isolation periods,
lockdown durations, “flattening the curve”, relaxing restriction phases,
measuring the R-nought, the race for a vaccine: the language of the
pandemic is shaped by space and time. In turn, technology-enabled
maps, graphs and curves shape our temporal awareness by ordering our
understanding of covid-19’s progress through space and time. Before the
crisis, many adults spoke of having “no time”. Time was “managed” in
perceivable, episodic chunks, rather than uncertain, extended lengths.
During lockdown there is an “excess” of time and a seemingly extended,
intensified duration of uncertainty. The solid, time-based routines that
we rigidly imposed upon our liquid lives, as well as the solid routines
that were imposed upon us, have effectively been made redundant, with
potential now for further long-term change (see subsection 4.2.3).

The long-term is of little perceivable interest in liquid modernity. To
mitigate adiaphorization decision-makers must consider the long-term
impacts of control measures under significant pressures of real-time
implementation and scrutiny, with ‘the most ethically contentious’
measures in pandemic-response typically those that require people to
change their behaviour (Williams & Dawson, 2020). A liquid-modern
lens expects that those least able to contribute to liquid-modern

International Journal of Information Management 55 (2020) 102184

priorities will fall further outside the scope of collective care during the
crisis: in the context of control, it is ironically those groups perhaps least
spatiotemporally impacted by pandemic control measures - the
chronically poor (UNICEF press release, May 2020), the homeless
(WIRED, April 2020), asylum seekers (World Economic Forum, April
2020) and nursing home residents (The Economist3, May 2020) - who
suffer most during lockdown. The plight of nursing home residents in
many jurisdictions is particularly egregious, not least because they are
the constituency deemed most vulnerable to the virus. Not recording
the deaths of nursing home residents in data reports (Comas-Herrera
et al., 2020) is not only a corruption of the data but one of the gravest
ethical calamities of the pandemic. Decision-makers will claim that the
pandemic presented a situation of unprecedented uncertainty. The
reality is that these complex, uncertain conditions have been devel-
oping for some time. Beth Galetti, senior vice president at Amazon: “We
are frequently doing things that have never been done before... there is
often no playbook to teach nor experts to follow, so we empower people
to try new things and learn along the way” (McKinsey2, February
2020). When the past and the future are subsumed by the present and
‘systems and processes become split off from any consideration of
morality’ (Bauman & Lyon, 2013) our modernising project becomes a
perpetual series of short-termist, disconnected Sisyphean tasks.

3.5. Exterritorial power resists regulation and reinforces inequalities

Exterritorial power resists regulation on multiple levels. Big data is
collected at speed, continuously, in vast quantities and, in a very liquid-
modern way, ‘more often than not, without a specific purpose in mind’
(Miller, Junglas, vom Brocke, & Debortoli, 2016). One pandemic study
has collected more than 50 million covid-19-related tweets and will
continue collection ‘uninterruptedly for the foreseeable future’ (Chen
et al., 2020). With big data also an ‘informatics of domination’
(Haraway, 1991) enabling new concentrations of power (Crawford,
Miltner, & Gray, 2014), the responsibilities of technology developers
(ienca & Vayena, 2020) with respect to the secondary, tertiary and
Opaque uses of our personal information must now be highlighted,
expanded and variegated. As it stands, technologies continue to be ra-
pidly upgraded and deployed while our social responsibilities seem to
often rest upon liquid aspiration and jargon. Twitter, for instance,
grants real-time access to its complete stream of tweets to select part-
ners only (Boyd & Crawford, 2012) but such regulations are easily, li-
quidly circumvented with technological tools like the Hydrator (Chen
et al., 2020). Regulations and guidelines are also politically cir-
cumvented. The Global System for Mobile Communications (GSMA), an
organisation representing more than 750 mobile operators worldwide,
published guidelines for the protection of information privacy during
the 2014-2016 Ebola outbreak (GSMA, 2014). Including anonymisa-
tion of phone numbers; not identifying individuals; not transferring
data beyond the individual operating system and not sharing data with
third parties, China Mobile, China Telecom and China Unicom, three
state-owned Chinese telecommunication companies, are signed-up
members of the GSMA. During the current crisis, major concerns (The
Guardian1l, April, 2020) have already been raised about the Alibaba-
developed, Chinese-state-supported, ‘Alipay Health Code’ app, which
spatiotemporally and publicly tracks citizens (Barbieri & Darnis, 2020)
and breaks each of the GSMA guidelines. There are suggestions that
collected data are being shared with state police (lenca & Vayena,
2020) and reports that Beijing is censoring criticism, scrubbing the
internet and detaining people for spreading “rumours” (The New York
Times, January 2020).

Hungary, a member of the “fragile” Schengen area, passed emer-
gency covid-19 legislation allowing Prime Minister Victor Orban to rule
by decree indefinitely (Vijaya et al., 2020). Five days later Prime
Minister Orban suspended ‘the individual data subject’s rights pursuant
to... European GDPR’ (privacy-ticker.com, May 2020). Hungarian
lockdown measures are being relaxed since 4 May 2020
R. Doyle and K. Conboy

(hungarytoday.hu, May 2020) but, as of the time of writing, informa-
tion privacy restrictions have not changed. When exterritorial liquid-
modern power can be so easily circumvented, appropriated, manipu-
lated and undermined, frequent IS and technology developer calls to
give the “power” to the end-users (Nanni et al., 2020) can seem not only
disingenuous but an atomistic abdication of social responsibility, akin
to blaming the person pulling the trigger and not the gun itself. A global
trading system with ‘an unstable web of national controls’ will not be
more humane or safer (The Economist2, May 2020).

3.6. Private individualism undermines public agency and citizenship

Miiller et al. (2016) note that the authors of many high-impact big
data studies are affiliated with companies like Google (Ginsberg et al.,
2009; Michel et al., 2011) and Facebook (Kramer, Guillory, & Hancock,
2014). As Kitchin (2014) points out, big data is not ‘free from ‘the
regulating force of philosophy” (Berry, 2011). The philosophies un-
derlying big data production are informed by order-building, economic
progress and globalization. The Goldman Sachs-coined ‘FAAMG Stocks’,
identifying Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Microsoft and Google (in-
vestopedia.com, 2020), make up 21 % of the S&P 500’s market value
during the first quarter of 2020, approximately equal to the combined
stock market value of the financial, industrial and energy sectors, with
“no physical contact and lockdowns [meaning] this is a crisis that al-
most works in technology’s favour” (CNN Business, May 2020; our
italics).

The privatisation of information is ‘the result of the powerful nor-
mative effect exerted by technology’ (Lucchi, 2007) but information
privacy is rarely studied as a multi-level concept with multi-level im-
pacts (Smith et al., 2011). Calls for the European Commission to act in a
centralised manner in relation to data collection (Barbieri & Darnis,
2020) might seem to present a window of controlling opportunity to the
public sector in the EU, where private concern now habitually super-
sedes public agency. However, the public sector, with its own vested
interests for maintaining the region’s fragile instability (subsection 3.3),
is now increasingly susceptible to undermining itself. The official 19
March 2020 statement issued by the European Data Protection Board
(EDPB) is, in this context, revealing. Highlighting transparency, acces-
sibility, security and confidentiality, each EDPB data processing ‘core
principle’ for European employers refers the employer back to national
legislation (EDPB, 2020).

The corporate, political and individual motivations of privatism
contract the traditional public space and threaten the efficacy of de-
mocratic agency by, firstly, fragmenting the interests of a “public” that
is now effectively “private” and, secondly, by blatantly enabling attacks
on the democratic ideal through scandals like Cambridge Analytica.
The 520-mile roundtrip by Dominic Cummings (chief advisor to UK
prime minister Boris Johnson) during lockdown is no less blatant an
illustration of private incentive undermining public duty. In the context
of control, it is suggested that ‘only by collaborating with concerned
communities... can we ensure the efficacy of quarantine orders’
(Depoux et al., 2020; our italics). There is no way that the efficacy of
quarantine orders can be ensured but there is a burden of responsibility
on those proposing or developing technologies to be precise in lan-
guage, lest the technologically deterministic myth of a technological
solution for every social problem (Forbes2, 2019) be further perpe-
tuated. The European ‘personal data store’ approach (Nanni et al.,
2020), where citizens voluntarily — or liquidly — share spatiotemporal
information during lockdown, as well as all proposals requiring vo-
luntary downloading of contact tracing apps, will be critically under-
mined by the unstable reliability of privatised citizenry acting vo-
luntarily and unilaterally. The ideal of the Platonic citizen, with
incumbent civic responsibilities and a communal meeting place in the
agora, is liquified in contemporary modernity by a rampant, privatised
individualism that erodes genuine mutual interest.

International Journal of Information Management 55 (2020) 102184

3.7. Emancipated identity is commodified, requiring perpetual
reconstruction

Does emancipated, mutable identity enforce or erode ethical re-
sponsibility? Alibaba’s first quarter revenue in 2020 rises 22 % year
over year (Forbes3). Amazon’s net sales are up more than $10 billion
from first quarter 2019 (The Irish Times, May 2020). Ethical con-
siderations for the individual purchaser during the pandemic (Steele,
2020), particularly before purchasing a “non-essential” item, might
include: Is my purchase putting the health of workers at risk? Does not
purchasing put their livelihoods at risk? Beneath a liquid-modern lens,
and seemingly supported by cited sales figures, the ethical indifference
of the distantiated, isolated mouse-click for a non-essential online
purchase emerges as an ephemeral symbol of pure pandemic adia-
phorization. Whatever the purchase may imply about me in the instant
of the purchase can be forgotten instantaneously and will certainly not
apply when the purchased item is delivered, as possession of the item
itself will define my identity differently.

The identity on the other side of the mouse-click is also mutable. If
Henry Ford and the Fordist factory (Gramsci, 1934) were the proto-
typical symbols of solid modernity and industry, Jeff Bezos and Amazon
may be the prototypical symbols of liquid modernity and technology.
Amazon updates daily its covid-19 blog of positive company im-
plementations for Amazon employees, customers and the wider com-
munity (blog.aboutamazon.com, 2020). In contrast, a coalition of
thirteen US state attorneys general have signed an open letter to
Amazon, stating dismay with inadequate health and safety measures at
warehouses, noting company retaliation against employees raising
health concerns and requesting that data concerning infected em-
ployees, which is being withheld, be disclosed (Mass.gov, May 2020). In
relation to the data, when questioned during an interview on CBS’s ‘60
Minutes’, Amazon’s senior vice president of worldwide operations,
Dave Clark, says: “I don’t have the number right on me at this moment
because it’s not a particularly useful number” (The Seattle Times, May
2020). Should this aspect of Amazon’s identity amend the Australian
and Canadian governments’ decision to contract with Amazon for sto-
rage of covid-19 data (Klein, 2020)? Or can this aspect be easily — li-
quidly — set aside?

3.8. Uncertainty is generated and required in liquid modernity

To apply the liquid-modern uncertainty principle, we turn to the
area of fake news (Conroy, Rubin, & Chen, 2015), which is now con-
sidered one of the main threats to twenty-first century global society
(Del Vicario et al., 2017). In the context of the pandemic the WHO
Director General says: “we’re not just battling the virus, we’re also
battling the trolls and conspiracy theories that undermine our response”
(BBC News, 2020). Defining fake news and effectively distinguishing it
from similar constructs, such as misinformation and disinformation, is
challenging. Where each of the constructs have been inconsistently
characterised by an intention to knowingly disseminate false informa-
tion (Lazer et al., 2018), only fake news is consistently associated with
anti-establishment, marginalised actors of nefarious threat to main-
stream society: ‘trolls’ and conspiracy theorists (BBC News, 2020),
‘political activists, scammers, alternative news media and hostile gov-
ernments’ (Bernard, Dennis, Khan, & Webster, 2019). However, when
all logical extensions of control to stop fake news end in forms of solid
censorship, fake news itself becomes quintessentially liquid-modern
and democratic. Firstly, the right to distribute fake news speaks to
emancipated, privatised individualism by, in theory, providing all
WWW users with platforms for their privatised voices to be made
“public”. Secondly, the act of disseminating fake news can be seen as a
demonstration of unanchored liquid-modern “control”, where control
in itself becomes a form of disruption. Thirdly, the liquefication of in-
stitutional credibility by fake news (Lazer et al., 2018) necessarily
creates the liquid-modern space for counterpoint information. Fourthly,
R. Doyle and K. Conboy

the counterpoint information creates the space for counter-counterpoint
information and so on. This process is inherently innovative: the un-
certainty (anxiety, frustration or anger (liquidity)) generated by fake
news motivates the need for enhanced certainty (solidity) which mo-
tivates in turn the propagation of further information (liquidity). A li-
quid-modern lens frames the exponential rise of fake news and atten-
dant uncertainties as being both inevitable and required in the current
conditions. Consequently, it is now ‘almost impossible’ to determine
whether a news item is false or accurate based upon the news item itself
(Laato, Islam, Islam, & Whelan, 2020).

Fake news will not and should not be controlled. In the context of
control, global platforms to combat the real-time spread of covid-19
rumour may do more harm than good, in spite of research that aims to
enable stakeholders with ‘proactive and engaging’ response-narratives
(Depoux et al., 2020). Will algorithms make the subtle socio-political
distinction between rumour and concern within and between jurisdic-
tions? Will algorithms, like so many technology researchers and de-
velopers, seem to assume stakeholder integrity? On 30 January 2020
should a concerned, uncertain American citizen be assuaged and act
accordingly when US head of state Donald Trump says: “We only have
five people, we pretty much shut it down coming from China” (The
Guardian2, April 2020)? On 12 March 2020 should a concerned, un-
certain British citizen be assuaged and act accordingly when Prime
Minister Boris Johnson seems to announce the country’s initial herd
immunity approach to the pandemic (The Atlantic, March 2020)? Was
news that the Trump administration tried to buy a future vaccine fake
news (Die Welt, March 2020)? Was news that the Trump administration
didn’t try to buy a future vaccine fake news (Politico, 2020)? If data has
been withheld are our data stories fake news? Fake news is not simply a
tool for the disenfranchised, the dissatisfied, the misguided and the
marginalised; fake news represents us all and the old aphorism may still
well apply: just as we usually get the politicians that we deserve, in
liquid modernity we may now get the news that we deserve. Fake news
is an innovative function of the liquid-modern world. Fake news will be
disseminated and absorbed or rejected regardless of external control
measures. Fake news is an ephemeral solidification of our liquid-
modern values. We must learn how to live in these uncertain times, not
try and try again to control the uncontrollable.

3.9. Liquid modernity creates paradoxical conditions

Our efforts to stabilise everything are making everything less stable.
In the context of data analysis, one study will present solid findings
around homophilous behaviour on social media platforms (Del Vicario
et al., 2017), while another states that up to 15 % of Twitter accounts
are automated social bots, with any success at detecting bots likely
inspiring liquid ‘countermeasures by bot producers’ (Lazer et al., 2018).
How reliable can IS research on human group dynamics be when we
cannot even be sure that all of the group members are human? The
patterns found within data sets are neither ‘inherently meaningful nor
reliable’ and interpreting them as such can ‘produce serious ecological
fallacies’ (Kitchin, 2014). Did our pandemic data patterns include
nursing home residents? And if not, why not? The point is not to deny
the importance of analytics in the pandemic response but rather to
highlight that, in liquid modernity, with data patterns themselves in-
herently mutable, it is not the case for analytics that is under severe
threat, but the case for accumulated human intuition (see 4.1.1).

In the context of big data, ‘Cognitive Load Theory’ has been shown
to undermine trust between people (Samson & Kostyszyn, 2015) and
also the trust of people toward AI systems (Zhou et al., 2020). Laato
et al. (2020) note that humans experiencing information overload are
likely to make careless decisions (Samson & Kostyszyn, 2015). The
paradoxicalities of liquid modernity see information exposure in-
creasing exponentially, which drives the motivation to order the in-
formation, which increases the information load, which increases the
instability, which increases the uncertainty, which furthers the collapse

International Journal of Information Management 55 (2020) 102184

of trust and increases the potentiality for dangerous decision-making:
‘in a world of communication, the problem is noise’ (Bauman, 1987).
Hence, it is the individual’s choice that now limits exposure to ideolo-
gically diverse news and opinion more than algorithmic filtering
(Bakashy, Messing, & Adamic, 2015) and while these human, identity-
making choices may increase harmony within social sub-groups they
decrease harmony between sub-groups (Settle, 2018). A liquid-modern
lens anticipates that individuals will not embrace the emancipatory
power of social media (Castells, 2007) but rather choose to ease con-
sumptive-choice anxiety in the familiarity of routinised internet path-
ways and in newsfeeds that support rather than challenge the subjective
worldview. Users want a semblance of solidity as much as the IS re-
searcher, developer or practitioner. In this light, IS findings that social
media paradoxically support both emancipation and hegemony
(Miranda, Young, & Yetgin, 2016) are not surprising. Homophily and
polarisation are a very solid, human response to liquid uncertainty.

3.10. Uneven liquid differentiation generates wicked problems

If the spread of covid-19 is partly a result of digital and technolo-
gical change in the past century (Keesara, Jonas, & Schulman, 2020) it
might, in the present context, be considered a ‘liquid’ pandemic. In this
light, the Pandemic Influenza of 1918, which spread more slowly and
accounted for the majority of its victims in its second wave (Barro,
Ursua, & Weng, 2020), might be considered a ‘solid’ pandemic. In the
centurial interim the modernising project has established global, if li-
quidly differentiated, spread (Bauman, 2004).

It is suggested that technologies hold global solutions for local
problems (weforum.org, 2018) but local solutions cannot necessarily be
scaled globally (Turchin, Denkenberger, & Green, 2019). Liquid mod-
ernity’s uneven spread, particularly between developed and developing
sectors and regions, implies that the emergent task for policymakers
now is, in fact, to find local solutions for global problems (Bauman, 2004;
our italics). The pandemic highlights this situation quite clearly when,
for example, control measures reasonably suggested in one region are
inappropriate for another or when vaccine research customarily as-
sumes ‘the conditions of a liberal western democracy’ because the
‘overwhelming majority’ of pandemic vaccine literature originates in
Europe and North America (Williams & Dawson, 2020). Liquid differ-
entiation (Turner, 2003) intensifies the scaling complexity associated
with all technological interventions and highlights regional differences
in the rate of assumed modern progress, where developing nations
maintain greater reliance on solid infrastructures, with developed na-
tions evidently more liquid. Liquid stratification is not only nationally
differentiated: when pandemic research notes that social media users
from developed cities ‘attract more social capital which will enlarge
their influence upon others’ (Li et al., 2020), what regional disparities
might big data research propagate through the socio-political inter-
ventions that the studies inform?

Finally, there are also concerns around the emergence of a ‘data
divide’ (Marton, Avital, & Jensen, 2013). With companies like Google
(Ginsberg et al., 2009; Michel et al., 2011), Facebook (Kramer et al.,
2014) and Twitter (Boyd & Crawford, 2012) attempting to place solid
controls around their data, the ‘haves and the have nots’ (Trauth, 2017)
include those with and without access to information. During the
pandemic Amazon has been identified (The Seattle Times, May 2020)
and China is widely suspected of withholding important data (Scissors,
2020). Susceptible, differentiated data pictures, with data not ‘simply
[speaking] for themselves, free of human bias or framing’ (Kitchin,
2014).
R. Doyle and K. Conboy

4. Recommendations
4.1. Recommendations for IS pandemic research

4.1.1.

The Black Death pandemic in fourteenth century Europe ‘catalysed
enormous societal, economic, artistic and cultural reforms’ and pro-
voked ‘fundamental shifts in peoples’ interactions and experience with
religion, philosophy and politics’ (Griffin & Denholm, 2020). Wickedly
entangled with technological change, the covid-19 pandemic has the
potential to be even more impactful because technology too is bringing
the very real possibility of a paradigmatic shift in our approach to
making sense of the world (Gregor & Klein, 2014; Kitchin, 2014). ‘Out
with every theory of human behaviour, from linguistics to sociology...
there’s no reason to cling to our old ways’ (Anderson, 2008). The lan-
guage is reminiscent of solid modernist Henry Ford, speaking in 1916:
“History is... bunk. We don’t want tradition. We want to live in the
present and the only history that is worth a... damn is the history we
make today” (Butterfield, 1965): solid modernity, it seems, is being
reborn in cyberspace. A shift towards positivism must be resisted. If we
are near ‘the end of theory’ (Anderson, 2008), then the wisdom and
intuition accumulated through millennia of human experience and in-
teraction is under severe threat. Many twentieth-century human skills
are already redundant (Dede, 2009), with little inspiring evidence of
countermanding human upskilling. In the context of pandemic re-
search, the overarching application of a positivistic research lens would
be ethically and pragmatically disastrous.

4.1.2.

The scientific method is underpinned by the desire to order. Order
itself, however, and any attendant truth-claims, are fundamentally
mutable in liquid modernity. The covid-19 Surgisphere data scandal
(Piller, 2020) and the ‘Study 329’ Paxil scandal (Lane, 2015) are just
two cases of liquid-modern misconduct that involve researchers, data, a
medical analytics company, pharmaceutical companies, politicians, the
media and the general public. We must examine why the results of
‘flawed studies’ are still ‘treated as if they were breaking news’ (Lane,
2020). Additionally, order-building pandemic research objectives in-
formed by the need to assist ‘concerned authorities... sense the mood of
the public [and] the information gaps between the authority and the
public’ (Li et al., 2020) a are potentially compromised by the research
being funded by multiple Chinese state organisations. Constructive
dialogue must be initiated around the unilateral efficacy of the scien-
tific method. In liquid-modern conditions we must now relax — or make
more liquid — the autarchic need for establishing scientific “order”.
Mutable, data-supported empirical snapshots can be enhanced by fil-
tering less traditionally rigorous — or solid — research approaches. Can it
be the case that, in the context of this article, liquid-modern perspec-
tives are of no practical use at all unless empirically measurable?
Eighty-three percent today may be 93 % or 43 % six months from now
(McCarthy et al., 2020; see 3.3).

4.1.3.

Bauman’s decision to prioritise ethics over ontology (Campbell &
Till, 2010) positions liquid modernity as an alternative to pre-
dominating technocentric IS theories (Sahay, Sein, & Urquhart, 2017)
imbued with an informational capitalist agenda that can intensify so-
cietal inequalities (Trauth & Howcroft, 2006). In that spirit, the re-
sponsibility for meaningful human interconnection must rest with hu-
mans, not technologies. Technologies may facilitate interconnection,
but they should not drive and define it. To that end, IS research should
be reflective of the people that IS ultimately serve, and not a subset of
people predisposed to particular ontologies, methods and worldviews.
The perspective of those at the coalface of IS research must be ex-
panded. Conversely, but in the same spirit, independent researchers
should be afforded the same access to data as researchers affiliated with

International Journal of Information Management 55 (2020) 102184

technology companies.

4.1.4.

Liquid modernity is not a technophobic thesis. Neither is it a theory
for sociology, or for philosophy, a line of argument that contributes to
the solid siloing of academic interest and intent, ignores the wicked
nature of the problems outlined in Sections 2 and 3 and puts researchers
and developers at continual risk of making un-reflexive, inaccurate
assumptions about the integration of people and technologies. Open,
constructive, cross-disciplinary assimilation of divergent worldviews is
urgently required in IS. Explored and applied by IS scholars (including
Boland, 1991; Myers, 1995; Butler, 1998), the relative novelty of the
hermeneutical approach in mainstream IS research, for example, does
presentsignificant challenges (Cole & Avison, 2007) but may also pre-
sent a collaborative way forward. In Bauman’s approach to herme-
neutics, ‘by spotting the general in the particular’ (Bauman, 1978) our
understanding becomes circuitous and everything remains necessarily
open to reinterpretation (Davis, 2020). Even empirical data can be re-
illuminated by the hermeneutic method (Smith, 2007). Any consensus
of understanding - however temporary or localised - that a dialectical
hermeneutical approach informed by liquid-modern principles might
illuminate between all stakeholders in targeted stages of the IS devel-
opment process, might be the most stable thing that we can hope for in
liquid modernity.

4.2. Recommendations for practice in the context of the covid-19 pandemic

4.2.1.

In the context of the pandemic, we must make distinctions between
what we must try to control, and what we should not even try to control.
The common pre-vaccine prioritisation of groups for vaccine access, for
example, can be fatally counterproductive as conditions change
(Williams & Dawson, 2020). With our temporal horizon effectively
“framed” by the present, postponing pandemic mitigations based on
any prioritisation criteria is fraught with danger. The developing si-
tuation in Brazil (The Guardian3, June 2020) is a case in point. Clearly
we must try to control the spread of the virus. On the other hand, trying
to control the spread of pandemic fake news is misguided. Similarly, we
must question the efficacy of official regulations and guidelines that are
easily, liquidly circumvented. If the guidelines or regulations can be
circumvented, creating them becomes an exercise in jargon-production
and a waste of resources. This is not defeatism. A clear, honest ac-
knowledgment of the present conditions may inspire new research ap-
proaches, increase societal trust and free up resources that can be better
applied.

4.2.2.

As social inequalities are rapidly intensified during pandemics
(Ahmed, Ahmed, Pissarides, & Stiglitz, 2020), it may be helpful for
decision-makers to multi-level conceptualise solidity and liquidity
when designing pandemic interventions. All control measures, while
potentially stimulating benefit in one area, will necessarily destabilise
another. Country of residence, for example, will likely become ‘a sig-
nificant contributing factor’ determining access to vaccine (Williams &
Dawson, 2020). If solid interventions, structures and systems are de-
signed with the knowledge that they are being undermined, con-
ceptualisations of the optimal balance between solidity and liquidity
may be inspired. In organisations, for example, it is noted that ‘en-
trenched systems that... supported businesses for years — tech stacks,
reporting lines, processes — have been no match for the dynamic fluidity
of the current crisis (McKinseyl, May 2020; our italics). The crisis in-
tensifies our awareness of fluidity but the eventual passing of the crisis
will not see fluidity solidified, only more widely differentiated in ways
that diminish the current awareness. We must take advantage of our
current awareness and not continue to think as we did in a bygone age,
imposing the same solid objectives on conditions that are now - and
R. Doyle and K. Conboy

have been for some time - fundamentally different.

4.2.3.

Liquid modernity recasts traditional conceptualisations of manage-
ment. Twitter has announced that staff are permitted to work from
home ‘forever’ (siliconrepublic.com, May 2020). Organisations big,
medium and small that wish to get ahead of the curve will follow suit.
IS will facilitate this transition but systems must be designed with the
individual, societal and organisational dangers this transition presents
to the forefront of the design process. When the creation of wealth now
‘coincides with the whole time of life’ (Terranova, 2006) such a radical
shift is fraught with risk. Working from home, however, is also in-
herently liquid-modern. Stretched to its logical conclusion, liquid
modernity undermines the traditional need for management entirely.
Managers and decision-makers can no longer even be sure who is ac-
tually in control, when it is now more likely that the assumed con-
troller/s and the real controller/s in any situation are not even in the
same room, building or time-zone.

4.2.4.

Pandemic decision-makers must not be unduly impressed by the
magnitude of big data. A library that is bigger is not necessarily better
(Borges, 1944). Contrastingly, but in support of the same point, ‘the
underdetermination of scientific theory’ is a philosophical argument
that suggests that the evidence (or data) available to us at any parti-
cular time may be inadequate for determining what beliefs we should
hold in response to that evidence (Stanford, 2017). Decision-makers
must not be excessively guided by data patterns that are themselves
mutable, corruptible and incomplete. However, holistically inclusive
decision-making processes must be more than superficially collabora-
tive. The plight of nursing home residents may have been mitigated by
a decision-making framework that limited adiaphorization, which
subsequently begs the question: can big data be ethical? The safest
route into the future for all, and one that may facilitate the transition
from ‘technology-centred development toward human-centred design’
(Crang & Graham, 2007), is the route that simply puts people first in
decision-making processes. In the context of information privacy, IS
research is habitually conducted in isolation from the actual users of the
privacy tools (Bélanger & Crossler, 2011). Contact-tracing app devel-
opment provides pandemic researchers with an immediate opportunity
to centre people and pragmatically address this concern. The guiding
principle must not be what we can do, but rather what we should do.

4.2.5.

The pandemic does present ‘a great opportunity for digital tech-
nologies’ (Ting et al., 2020). However, if digital transformation is the
‘elixir of the twenty-first century’ (Datta, Walker, & Amarilli, 2020) we
would be well advised to be prudent in our language and cautious in
our approach to rapid transformation that is happening regardless of
collective intent. The United States’ health system may indeed require a
comprehensive ‘digital revolution’, ‘unleashing the power of digital
technologies’ (Keesara et al., 2020). However, when those delivering
public digital transformation solutions are, in some digital quarters,
unironically dubbed “missionaries” (Datta et al., 2020), the reality of
digital evangelism is made explicit. The pandemic response is better
conceived as ‘a largescale social experiment’ (Arner et al., 2020),
wherein underlying conditions of critical liquid-modern mutability -
conditions already present before the virus began to spread - may now be
more clearly perceived, understood and acted upon.

5. Conclusions & future research direction

In liquid modernity there is no longer any playbook. Where progress
and innovation will bring us next, no one knows. Neither does anyone
know when or where the next pandemic — the next crisis — will come
from. As of 19:19 h on 12 June 2020, the ‘Worldometer’ records

International Journal of Information Management 55 (2020) 102184

2,099,910 covid-19 cases and counting in the United States, with
116,273 deaths (www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/us). Fresh out-
breaks of the virus have raised fears of a second wave, with officials in
Texas saying they are ‘approaching the precipice of disaster’ (Financial
Review, June 2010). However, with ‘Black Lives Matter’ protests es-
calating and spreading, (www.blacklivesmatter.com), it is unclear
which crisis is now being prioritised in the minds of the people and the
minds of the authorities.

In the context of this article, the real opportunity presented by the
covid-19 pandemic is the opportunity for those who research, develop
and use digital technologies to fundamentally reflect and reorientate
(Sein, 2020). Incredible work is being done in IS and this is a very
exciting time for the field. However, those who research and develop
technologies must be adequately conscious of, and exposed to, the ne-
gative impacts of those technologies (Chiasson et al., 2018). Liquid
modernity is, by nature, a fluid theory, with interdependencies between
concepts and many layers of complexity. Nevertheless, for our future
research direction we believe that liquid-modern theoretical principles,
appropriately presented, can provide the IS field with an alternative,
important and very timely critical lens. Our collective hopes and as-
pirations, however liquefied they may be and however they may be
collectivised, must not remain in perpetual, hopeless pursuit of tech-
nological innovation.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported with the financial support of the Science
Foundation Ireland grant 13/RC/2094 and co-funded under the
European Regional Development Fund through the Southern & Eastern
Regional Operational Programme to Lero - the Science Foundation
Ireland Research Centre for Software (www.lero.ie)

References

Abbasi, A., Sarker, S., & Chiang, R. H. L. (2016). Big data research in information systems:
Toward an inclusive research agenda. Journal of the Association for Information
Systems, 17(2), 3. https://doi.org/10.17705/1jais.00423.

Agarwal, R., & Dhar, V. (2014). Editorial—big data, data science, and analytics: The
opportunity and challenge for IS research. Information Systems Research, 25(3),
443-448.

Ahmed, F., Ahmed, N., Pissarides, C., & Stiglitz, J. (2020). Why inequality could spread
COVID-19. Lancet. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468-2667(20)30085-2 PMCID:
PMC7270465; PMID: 32247329.

Alimadadi, A., Aryal, S., Manandhar, I., Munroe, P., Joe, B., & Cheng, X. (2020). Artificial
intelligence and machine learning to fight COVID-19. The American Physiological
Society, 52(4).

Americans for Tax Fairness, Tale of Two Crises: Billionaires Gain As Workers Feel Pandemic
Pain, Institute for Policy Studies, May 2020, https://americansfortaxfairness.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020-5-21-Billionaires-Press-Release-at-Two-month-Covid-
Pandemic-FINAL. pdf.

Anderson, C. (2008). The end of theory: The data deluge makes the scientific method obsolete.
WIRED (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.wired.com/2008/06/pb-
theory/).

Andrade, A., & Urquhart, C. (2012). Unveiling the modernity bias: A critical examination
of the politics of ICT4D. Information Technology for Development, 4(18), 281-292.
Arner, D. W., Barberis, J. N., Walker, J., Buckley, R. P., Dahdal, A. M., & Zetzsche, D. A.

(2020). Digital finance & the COVID-19 crisis. https://ssrn.com/abstract = 3558889.

Bakashy, E., Messing, S., & Adamic, L. (2015). Exposure to ideologically diverse news and
opinion on Facebook. Science, 348(6239), 1130-1132.

Baldwin, C., & Von Hippel, E. A. (2020). Modeling a paradigm shift: From producer in-
novation to user and open collaborative innovation. Institute for Operations Research
and the Management Sciences (INFORMS).

Barbieri, C., & Darnis, J.-P. (2020). Technology: An exit strategy for COVID-19? Instituto
Affari Internazionali.

Barro, R., Ursua, J., & Weng, J. (2020). The coronavirus and the great influenza pandemic:
Lessons from the “Spanish flu” for the coronavirus’s potential effects on mortality and
economic activity. NBER Working Paper No. 26866, Document Object
Identifierhttps://doi.org/10.3386/w26866.

Bauman, Z. (1978). Hermeneutics and social science. Hutchinson Co.

Bauman, Z. (2000). Liquid modernity. Cambridge, UK: Malden, MA: Polity Press;
Blackwell.

Bauman, Z. (2004). Wasted lives; modernity and its outcasts. Polity Press; Blackwell
Publishing.

Bauman, Z. (2007). Liquid Times; living in an age of uncertainty. Polity Press.

Bauman, Z. (2011). Migration and identities in the globalized world. Philosophy & Social
R. Doyle and K. Conboy

Criticism, 37(4), 425-435. https://doi.org/10.1177/0191453710396809.

Bauman, Z., & Lyon, D. (2013). Liquid surveillance. Polity Press.

Bauman, Z. (1987). Legislators and Interpreters: On Modernity, Postmodernity and
Intellectuals. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Bauman, Z. (2011). Collateral Damage: Social Inequalities in a Global Age. Cambridge:
Polity.

BBC News (2020). Coronavirus: WHO chief warns against ‘trolls and conspiracy theories'
(accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.bbc.com/news/world-51429400).
Bélanger, F., & Crossler, R. (2011). Privacy in the digital age: A review of information

privacy research in information systems. MIS Quarterly, 35, 1017-1041.

Benbya, H., Nan, N., Tanriverdi, H., & Yoo, Y. (2020). Complexity and information sys-
tems research in the emerging digital world. MIS Quarterly, 44(1), 1-17.

Bernard, J.-G., Dennis, A., Khan, A., & Webster, J. (2019). The tangled web: Studying
online fake news. ICIS 2019 proceedings.

Berry, D. (2011). The computational turn: Thinking about the digital humanities. Culture
Machine, 12.

blog.aboutamazon.com (2020). Amazon’s “Covid-19 blog”. accessed 14 June 2020: blo-
g.aboutamazon.com/.

Boland, R. J. (1991). Information system use as a hermeneutic process. In H. Nissen, H. K.
Klein, & R. Hirschheim (Eds.). Information system research: Contemporary approaches
and emergent traditions (pp. 439-458). North-Holland: Elsevier Science
Publishers B.V.

Borges, J. L. (1975). The Book of Sand (English-language edition). Emecé Editores.

Borges, J. L. (1944). The library of babel in the garden of forking paths. Editorial Sur.

Boyd, D., & Crawford, K. (2012). Critical questions for big data. Information,
Communication and Society, 15(5), 662-679. https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118xX.
2012.678878.

Butler, T. (1998). Towards a hermeneutic method for interpretive research in information
systems. Journal of Information Technology, 13, 285-300.

Butterfield, R. (1965). Henry Ford, the Wayside Inn, and the problem of “History is
Bunk”. Proceedings of the Massachusetts historical society, third series, Vol. 77.

Campbell, T. (2013). The temporal horizon of “the choice”: Anxieties and banalities in “time”,
modern and liquid modern, Vol. 118, 19-32 Thesis Eleven, issue: 1.

Campbell, Tom, & Till, Christopher (2010). Resistance Towards Ethics. In Mark Davis, &
Keith Tester (Eds.). Bauman’s Challenge. London: Palgrave Macmillan.

Castells, Manuel (2007). Communication, Power and Counter-power in the Network
Society. International Journal of Communication, 1.

Chen, E., Lerman, K., & Ferrara, E. (2020). COVID-19: The first public coronavirus twitter
dataset.

Chiasson, M., Davidson, E., Winter, J., Hassan, R., Mingers, J., & Stahl, B. (2018).
Philosophical foundations for informing the future(S) through IS research. European
Journal of Information Systems, 27(3), 367-379. https://doi.org/10.1080/0960085xX.
2018.1435232.

CNN Business (2020). The economy is in shambles but Big Tech stocks are on fire our italics
(accessed online 14 June 2020:https://edition.cnn.com/2020/05/27/investing/
faang-stocks-market-amazon-tech/index.html).

Cole, M., & Avison, D. (2007). The potential of hermeneutics in information systems
research. European Journal of Information Systems, 16(6), 820-833. https://doi.org/
10.1057/palgrave.ejis.3000725.

Comas-Herrera, A., Zalakain, J., Litwin, C., Amy Hsu, T., Lemmon, E., Henderson, D., &
Fernandez, J.-L. (2020). Mortality associated with COVID-19 outbreaks in care homes:
Early international evidence (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://ltccovid.org/
2020/04/12/mortality-associated-with-covid-19-outbreaks-in-care-homes-early-in-
ternational-evidence/).

Conboy, K. (2009). Agility from first principles: Reconstructing the concept of agility in
information systems development. Information Systems Research, 20(3), 329-354.
Conroy, N., Rubin, V., & Chen, Y. (2015). Automatic deception detection: Methods for finding

fake news.

Crang, M., & Graham, S. (2007). Sentient cities, ambient intelligence and the politics of urban
space. Information, Communication & Society, Taylor & Francis.

Crawford, K., Miltner, K., & Gray, M. (2014). Critiquing big data: Politics, ethics, epis-
temology. International Journal of Communication, 8, 1663-1672.

Datta, P., Walker, L., & Amarilli, F. (2020). Digital transformation: Learning from Italy’s
public administration. Journal of Information Technology Teaching Cases. https://doi.
org/10.1177/2043886920910437.

Davis, M. (2013). Hurried lives: Dialectics of time and technology in liquid modernity.
Thesis Eleven, 118(1), 7-18.

Davis, M. (2020). Hermeneutics contra fundamentalism: Zygmunt Bauman’s method for
thinking in dark times. Thesis Eleven, 156(1), 27-44. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0725513619898285.

Dede, Chris (2009). Comparing Frameworks for 21st Century Skills. In James Bellanca
(Ed.). 21st Century Skills: Rethinking How Students Learn. Leading Edge.

Del Vicario, M., Zollo, F., Caldarelli, G., Scala, A., & Quattrociocchi, W. (2017). Mapping
social dynamics on facebook: The Brexit debate, 50, Elsevier, Social Networks6-16.

Dennett, D. C. (1978). Brainstorms. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press/Bradford Books.

Depoux, A., Martin, S., Karafillakis, Preet, R., Wilder-Smith, A., & Larson, H. (2020). The
pandemic of social media panic travels faster than the COVID-19 outbreak. Journal of
Travel Medicine, 1-2.

Die Welt (2020). Diese Erfahrung wird Europa so schnell nicht vergessen (English translation
accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www. welt.de/wirtschaft/plus206563595/
Trump-will-deutsche-Impfstoff-Firma-CureVac-Traumatische-Erfahrung.html).

Dietrich, E. (2020). When science confronts philosophy: Three case studies.
Axiomatheshttps://doi.org/10.1007/s10516-019-09472-9.

Doyle, R., & Conboy, K. (2020). Considering the merits of applying liquid modernity as a
theoretical lens for information systems research. ECIS 2020 Research-in-Progress
Papers.

International Journal of Information Management 55 (2020) 102184

EDPB (2020). Statement by the EDPB Chair on the processing of personal data in the context of
the COVID-19 outbreak (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://edpb.europa.eu/news/
news/2020/statement-edpb-chair-processing-personal-data-context-covid-19-
outbreak_en).

Ellison, N. (2013). Citizenship, space and time: Engagement, identity and belonging in a
connected world. Thesis Eleven, 118(1), 48-63.

Financial review. (accessed online 14 June 2015:.

Fodor, J. A. (1987). Modules, frames, fridgeons, sleeping dogs and the music of the
spheres. In Z. Pylyshyn (Ed.). The robot's dilemma: The frame problem in artificial in-
telligence. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Forbes1. (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.forbes.com/billionaires/).

Forbes2. (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.forbes.com/sites/kalevleetaru/
2019/07/07 /a-reminder-that-fake-news-is-an-information-literacy-problem-not-a-
technology-problem/#d889f666a6f2).

Forbes3. (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.forbes.com/sites/franklavin/
2020/05/25/chinas-e-commerce-players-post-strong-quarterly-results-despite-covid-
19/#317a1dca78a8).

Fuchs, C. (2017). Marx’s “Capital” in the information age. Capital & Class, 41(1), 51-67.

Ginsberg, J., Mohebbi, M., & Patel, R. (2009). Detecting influenza epidemics using search
engine query data. Nature, 457, 1012-1014. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07634.

Gramsci, A. (1934). Americanism and fordism. In Q. Hoare, & G. Smith (Eds.). 1999
selections from the prison notebooks of Antonio Gramsci (pp. 561-563). (electronic ed.).
ElecBook.

Gregor, S., & Klein, G. (2014). Eight obstacles to overcome in the theory testing genre.
Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 15(11), Article 5.

Griffin, D., & Denholm, J. (2020). This isn’t the first global pandemic, and it won’t be the last.
Here’s what we’ve learned from 4 others throughout history. accessed online 14 June
2020: https://theconversation.com/this-isnt-the-first-global-pandemic-and-it-wont-
be-the-last-heres-what-weve-learned-from-4-others-throughout-history-136231).

GSMA (2014). GSMA guidelines on the protection of privacy in the use of mobile phone data
for responding to the ebola outbreak (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://
www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/resources/gsma-guidelines-on-the-protec-
tion-of-privacy-in-the-use-of-mobile-phone-data-for-responding-to-the-ebola-out-
break/).

Guo, X., Vogel, D., Zhou, Z., Zhang, X., & Chen, H. (2009). Chaos theory as a Lens for
interpreting blogging. Journal of Management Information Systems, 26(1), 101-128.

Haraway, D. (1991). A cyborg manifesto, science, technology, and socialist-feminism in the
late twentieth century, in simians, cyborgs and women: The reinvention of nature. New
York: Routledge149-181 1991.

https://www.theguardian.com/news/2020/may/13/naomi-klein-how-big-tech-plans-to-
profit-from-coronavirus-pandemic. 2020. (Accessed 14 June 2020).

https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.23.20041319v1.article-info. 2020.
(Accessed 14 June 2020).

Hung, S.-C., & Tu, M.-F. (2014). Is small actually big? The Chaos of technological change.
Research Policy Elsevier, 43(7), 1227-1238.

hungarytoday.hu (2020). hungarytoday.hu: Hungary’s first week data after loosening cor-
onavirus restrictions shows drop in active cases. (May 2020) (accessed online 14 June
2020: https://hungarytoday.hu/hungarys-first-week-data-after-loosening-cor-
onavirus-restrictions-shows-drop-in-active-cases/).

Ienca, M., & Vayena, E. (2020). On the responsible use of digital data to tackle the COVID-
19 pandemic. Nature Medicine, 26, 463-464. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-
0832-5.

investopedia.com (2020). investopedia.com. (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://
www.investopedia.com/terms/f/faamg-stocks.asp).

Keesara, S., Jonas, A., & Schulman, K. (2020). Covid-19 and health care’s digital re-
volution. The New England Journal of Medicine, 382, e82.

Kitchin, R. (2014). Big Data, new epistemologies and paradigm shifts. Big Data & Society,
1-12.

Knight, W. (2020). The value and ethics of using phone data to monitor Covid-19, in wired
(accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.wired.com/story/value-ethics-using-
phone-data-monitor-covid-19).

Kramer, A., Guillory, J., & Hancock, J. (2014). Experimental evidence of massive-scale
emotional contagion through social networks. PNAS, 111(24), 8788-8790.

Laato, S., Islam, A. K. M., Islam, M., & Whelan, E. (2020). What drives unverified in-
formation sharing and cyberchondria during the COVID-19 pandemic? Furopean
Journal of Information Systems. https://doi.org/10.1080/0960085X.2020.1770632.

Lane, C. (2020). Outcome switching and withheld data in COVID-19 research. accessed online
14 June 2020: https://www.psychologytoday.com/ie/blog/side-effects/202005/
outcome-switching-and-withheld-data-in-covid-19-research?amp).

Lane, C. (2015). Study 329 (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.
psychologytoday.com/ie/blog/side-effects/201509/the-truth-about-study-329).
Lazer, David M. J., Baum, M. A., Benkler, Y., Berinsky, A. J., Greenhill, K. M., Menczer, F.,
et al. (2018). The science of fake news. Science, 359(6380), 1094-1096. https://doi.

org/10.1126/science.aao2998.

Lee, R. (2005). Bauman, Liquid Modernity and dilemmas of development. Thesis Eleven,
83, 61-77.

Li, L., Zhang, Q., Wang, X., Zhang, J., Wang, T., Gao, T.-L., et al. (2020). Characterizing
the propagation of situational information in social media during COVID-19 epi-
demic: A case study on weibo. IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems,
7(April (2)), 556-562. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSS.2020.2980007.

Lucchi, N. (2007). The supremacy of techno-governance: Privatization of digital content
and consumer protection in the globalized information society. International Journal
of Law and Information Technology, 15(2).

Marton, A., Avital, M., & Jensen, T. (2013). Reframing open big data. Paper presented at
the 21st European conference on information systems.

Maruping, L., Viswanath, V., & Agarwal, R. (2009). A control theory perspective on agile
R. Doyle and K. Conboy

methodology use and changing user requirements. Information Systems Research,
20(3), 377-399.

Mass.gov (2020). Mass.gov (accessed online 14 June 2020:https://www.mass.gov/news/
ag-healey-leads-multistate-group-urging-amazon-and-whole-foods-to-strengthen-
worker.

McCarthy, J., & Hayes, P. J. (1969). Some philosophical problems from the standpoint of
artificial intelligence. In B. Meltzer, & D. Michie (Eds.). Machine intelligence 4.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

McCarthy, A., Ahearne, A., Bohle Carbonell, K., O Siochain, T., & Frost, D. (2020). Remote
working during COVID-19: Ireland’s national survey initial reportGalway, Ireland: NUI
Galway Whitaker Institute & Western Development Commission.

McKelvey, B. (2004). Toward a complexity science of entrepreneurship. Journal of
Business Venturing, 19(3), 313-341 Elsevier.

McKinsey1 (2020). The digital-led recovery from COVID-19: Five questions for CEOs (ac-
cessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/
mckinsey-digital/our-insights/the-digital-led-recovery-from-covid-19-five-questions-
for-ceos).

McKinsey2 (2020). How Amazon is built to try and learn (accessed online 14 June 2020:
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/
fasttimes/interviews/beth-galetti).

Michel, J.-B., Kui Shen, Y., Presser Aiden, A., Veres, A., Gray, M. K., The Google Books
Team, Pickett, J. P., Hoiberg, D., Clancy, D., Norvig, P., Orwant, J., Pinker, S.,
Nowak, M. A., & Lieberman Aiden, E. (2011). Quantitative analysis of culture using
millions of digitized books. Science, 331(6014), 176-182. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science. 1199644.

Miranda, Shaila, Young, Amber, & Yetgin, Emre (2016). Are Social Media Emancipatory
or Hegemonic? Societal Effects of Mass Media Digitization in the Case of the SOPA
Discourse. MIS Quarterly, 40(2), 303-329.

Miiller, O., Junglas, I., vom Brocke, J., & Debortoli, S. (2016). Utilizing big data analytics
for information systems research: Challenges, promises and guidelines. European
Journal of Information Systems, 25(4).

Myers, M. D. (1995). Dialectical hermeneutics: A theoretical framework for the im-
plementation of information system. Information Systems Journal, 5(1), 51-70.

Nacoti, M., Ciocca, A., Giupponi, A., Brambillasca, P., Lussana, F., Pisano, M., et al.
(2020). At the epicenter of the covid-19 pandemic and humanitarian crises in Italy:
Changing perspectives on preparation and mitigation. NEJM Catalyst.

Nanni, M., et al. (2020). Give more data, awareness and control to individual citizens, and
they will help COVID-19 containment.

Palmer, Jack, Brzezinski, Dariusz, & Campbell, Tom (2020). Sixty-three years of thinking
sociologically: Compiling the bibliography of Zygmunt Bauman. Thesis Eleven,
156(1), 118-133.

Piller, C. (2020). Who’s to blame? These three scientists are at the heart of the Surgisphere
COVID-19 scandal (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.sciencemag.org/
news/2020/06/whos-blame-these-three-scientists-are-heart-surgisphere-covid-19-
scandal).

Politico (2020). German firm insists Trump didn’t try to buy coronavirus vaccine (accessed
online 14 June 2020: https://www.politico.eu/article/trump-coronavirus-vaccine-
germany-curevac/).

privacy-ticker.com (2020). privacy-ticker.com (Accessed online 14 June 2020: https://
www. privacy-ticker.com/hungarian-government-suspends-gdpr-rights-for-covid-19-
related-data-processing/).

Qi, C., Karlsson, D., Sallmen, K., & Wyss, R. (2020). Model studies on the COVID-19 pan-
demic in Sweden. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.33474.12480.

Sahay, S., Sein, M. K., & Urquhart, C. (2017). Flipping the context: ICT4D, the next grand
challenge for IS research and practice. Journal of the Association for Information
Systems, 18(12), 837-847.

Samson, K., & Kostyszyn, P. (2015). Effects of cognitive load on trusting behavior — An
experiment using the trust game. PLoS One, 10(5), e0127680.

Scissors, D. (2020). Estimating the true number of China’s COVID-19 cases(accessed online
14 June 2020: https://www.aei.org/research-products/report/estimating-the-true-
number-of-chinas-covid-19-cases/).

Sein, M. K. (2020). The serendipitous impact of COVID-19 pandemic: A rare opportunity
for research and practice. International Journal of Information Management. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.102164 PMCID: PMC7261442, [Epub ahead of
print].

Sekara, V., Stopczynski, A., & Lehmann, S. (2016). Fundamental structures of dynamic
social networks. PNAS, 113(36), 9977-9982.

Settle, J. E. (2018). Frenemies: How social media polarizes America. Cambridge University
Press.

Sheptycki, J. (2017). Liquid modernity and the police métier; thinking about information
flows in police organisation. Global Crime, 18(3), 286-302.

siliconrepublic.com (2020). siliconrepublic.com (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://
www.siliconrepublic.com/companies/twitter-remote-work-from-home-forever).

Smith, J. (2007). Hermeneutics, human sciences and health: Linking theory and practice.
International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health and Well-being, 2(1), 3-11.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17482620601016120.

Smith, H., Dinev, T., & Xu, H. (2011). Information privacy research: An interdisciplinary
review. MIS Quarterly, 35(4), 989-1015. https://doi.org/10.2307/41409970.

Stanford, K. (2017). In E. N. Zalta (Ed.). Underdetermination of scientific theory, the Stanford

10

International Journal of Information Management 55 (2020) 102184

encyclopedia of philosophy(winter 2017 edition). .

Steele, L. (2020). The ethics of ordering non-essential items online during the coronavirus
lockdown (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://theconversation.com/the-ethics-of-
ordering-non-essential-items-online-during-the-coronavirus-lockdown-135489).

Terranova, T. (2006). Of sense and sensibility: Immaterial labour in open systems. In J.
Krysa (Ed.). Curating immateriality: The work of the curator in the age of network systems
(pp. 27-36). Brooklyn: Autonomedia.

The Atlantic (2020). The U.K.’s coronavirus “Herd immunity” debacle (accessed online 14
June 2020: https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2020/03/coronavirus-
pandemic-herd-immunity-uk-boris-johnson/608065/).

The Economist1 (2020). Working life has entered a new era (accessed online 14 June 2020:
https://www.economist.com/business/2020/05/30/working-life-has-entered-a-
new-era).

The Economist2 (2020). Has covid-19 killed globalisation? (accessed online 14 June 2020:
https://www.economist.com/leaders/2020/05/14/has-covid-19-killed-globalisa-
tion).

The Economist3 (2020). Many covid deaths in care homes are unrecorded (accessed online
14 June 2020: https://www.economist.com/europe/2020/05/09/many-covid-
deaths-in-care-homes-are-unrecorded).

The Guardianl (2020). China’s coronavirus health code apps raise concerns over privacy
(accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/01/
chinas-coronavirus-health-code-apps-raise-concerns-over-privacy).

The Guardian2 (2020). How science finally caught up with Trump’s playbook — With millions
of lives at stake (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.theguardian.com/us-
news/2020/apr/04/trump-coronavirus-science-analysis).

The Guardian3 (2020). Judge orders Bolsonaro to resume publishing Brazil Covid-19 data
(accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/jun/09/
judge-orders-bolsonaro-to-resume-publishing-brazil-covid-19-data).

The Irish Times (2020). Amazon sales surge as retailer emerges as Covid-19 winner (accessed
online 14 June 2020: https://www.irishtimes.com/business/retail-and-services/
amazon-sales-surge-as-retailer-emerges-as-covid-19-winner-1.4242306).

The New York Times, & Yuan, L. (2020). China silences critics over deadly virus outbreak
(accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/22/health/
virus-corona.html).

The Seattle Times (2020). Amazon urged by 13 attorneys general to disclose data on worker
coronavirus infections and reinstate unpaid time off policy (accessed online 14 June
2020: https://www.seattletimes.com/business/amazon/amazon-urged-by-13-
attorneys-general-to-disclose-data-on-worker-coronavirus-infections-and-reinstate-
unpaid-time-off-policy/).

theverge.com (2020). theverge.com. (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.the-
verge.com/2020/4/23/21232401/zoom-300-million-users-growth-coronavirus-pan-
demic-security-privacy-concerns-response).

Till, C. (2011). Architects of time: Labouring on digital futures. Thesis Eleven, 118(1),
33-47.

Ting, D., Carin, L., Dzau, V., & Wong, T. (2020). Digital technology and COVID-19. Nature
Medicine, 26, 459-461.

Trauth, E. (2017). A research agenda for social inclusion in information systems. The Data
Base for Advances in Information Systems, 48(2), 9-20.

Trauth, E. M., & Howcroft, D. (2006). Social inclusion and the information systems field: Why
now?, IFIP International Federation for information processing, Vol. 208. Boston:
Springer.

Turchin, A., Denkenberger, D., & Green, B. (2019). Global solutions vs. Local solutions for
the AI safety problem. Big Data and Cognitive Computing, 3(16), https://doi.org/10.
3390/bdcec3010016.

Turner, B. (2003). McDonaldization: Linearity and liquidity in consumer cultures. The
American Behavioral Scientist, 47(2), 137-153.

UNICEF. (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.unicef.org/press-releases/covid-
19-number-children-living-household-poverty-soar-86-million-end-year).

Vijaya, R., Bebbington, A., Sarat, A., Dendere, C., Vila Benites, G., Shattuck, J., & Friesen,
P. (2020). Coronavirus versus democracy: 5 countries where emergency powers risk abuse
(accessed online 14 June 2020: https://theconversation.com/coronavirus-versus-
democracy-5-countries-where-emergency-powers-risk-abuse-135278).

weforum.org (2018). Global solutions for local problems.

Williams, J., & Dawson, A. (2020). Prioritising access to pandemic influenza vaccine: A
review of the ethics literature. BMC Medical Ethics, 21(40), https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12910-020-00477-3.

WIRED. (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.wired.com/story/coronavirus-
covid-19-homeless/).

World Economic Forum (2020). Refugees are on the front line of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Let's give them the rights they deserve (accessed online 14 June 2020: https://www.
weforum.org/agenda/2020/04/meet-the-asylum-seekers-on-the-frontline-of-the-
coronavirus/).

World Economic Outlook (2020). April 2020: The great lockdown (accessed online 14 June
2020 at: https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2020/04/14/weo-april-
2020).

www.blacklivesmatter.com. (accessed online 14 June 2020).

www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/us. (accessed online 19:19 hours, 12 June 2020).

Zhou, C., Su, F., Pei, T., Zhang, A., Du, Y., Luo, B., et al. (2020). COVID-19: Challenges to
GIS with big data. Geography and Sustainability, 1(1).
