Np} | Digital Medicine

ARTICLE OPEN

www.nature.com/npjdigitalmed

Trust and acceptance of a virtual psychiatric interview between
embodied conversational agents and outpatients

1,2,3%

Pierre Philip
Jean-Arthur Micoulaud-Franchi@®"'**

, Lucile Dupuy@'”, Marc Auriacombe ®"*%, Fushia Serre'**, Etienne de Sevin'”, Alain Sauteraud*”* and

Virtual agents have demonstrated their ability to conduct clinical interviews. However, the factors influencing patients’ engagement
with these agents have not yet been assessed. The objective of this study is to assess in outpatients the trust and acceptance of
virtual agents performing medical interviews and to explore their influence on outpatients’ engagement. In all, 318 outpatients
were enroled. The agent was perceived as trustworthy and well accepted by the patients, confirming the good engagement of
patients in the interaction. Older and less-educated patients accepted the virtual medical agent (VMA) more than younger and well-
educated ones. Credibility of the agent appeared to main dimension, enabling engaged and non-engaged outpatients to be
classified. Our results show a high rate of engagement with the virtual agent that was mainly related to high trust and acceptance
of the agent. These results open new paths for the future use of VMAs in medicine.

npj Digital Medicine (2020)3:2; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41 746-019-021 3-y

INTRODUCTION

Mental disorders are chronic conditions requiring repetitive and
time-consuming psychiatric consultations. Because of their
increasing prevalence in Western societies and the shortage of
physicians, there is a need for innovative clinical solutions to
interview patients without mobilising human resources.’ Digital
medicine is a promising solution to conduct patients’ follow-up,
and virtual medical agents (VMAs) have been considered as
potential candidates to assist real physicians.7* VMAs are
embodied conversational agents (ECAs), defined in the
human-computer interface (HCI) field as computer characters
able to engage in face-to-face dialogue through verbal and
nonverbal behaviour.’ ECAs have already been used in medicine
for the diagnosis,°° prevention,”'° and treatment of medical
conditions.''’'* Taken together, the above studies tend to show
that ECAs have a positive effect, as they rely on a virtual face-to-
face interaction, thus creating empathy for users and facilitating
disclosure of negatively connoted symptoms such as addiction,
depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder manifestations.° ®
In addition, ECAs can significantly help healthcare delivery by
saving physicians’ time, diminishing the variability between
professional interventions, providing 24/7 and _ easy-to-access
support and monitoring of patients, and by managing huge
volumes of medical data.

Nevertheless, to achieve these medical objectives consistently
over the long term, i.e, management of chronic diseases,
researchers need to support patients’ engagement with VMAs'*
by fostering a “strong doctor-patient relationship’.'* In a recent
publication by the Lancet psychiatry commission,'* experts
underlined two major dimensions that will consolidate engage-
ment with health technologies: acceptance and trust. Acceptance
and trust are complex and interrelated constructs evaluated with
various tools in the HCl literature, and therefore need a clear
theoretical background. In their article, Bhugra and colleagues
suggest that acceptance can be promoted by providing easy ways
to “entry and retrieval of data”, and by being “enjoyable to use”. In

the HCl literature, these constructs are commonly referred to as
the concepts of perceived ease of use (also called by some author
usability'?) and perceived usefulness (or satisfaction),'°~'” which
altogether can predict the use or rejection of technology in
general'*'® and ECAs in particular.'®'?

The second issue raised by Bhugra and colleagues is trust in the
digital device, so that “patients feel confident in sharing their
psychiatric history”, '* which is also a well-studied construct and a
central aspect of engagement with technologies. In the HCl
literature, Cassell & Bickmore”? proposed that trust in an ECA
occurs if the user perceives credibility and benevolence in the
agent. Credibility corresponds to the belief that the agent has the
ability and the expertise in a specific domain to perform the task,
and benevolence means that the agent cares about and will act
according to one’s interest. In terms of ECA design, Cassell &
Bickmore suggest that credibility can be shown to the user by
using expert vocabulary, adapted appearance, or professional
affiliation, whereas benevolence can be demonstrated through
greetings, small talk, or references to past experiences. In a non-
medical context, some studies have shown that perceived
credibility and benevolence can predict acceptance of wearable
technologies”! and ECA usage for e-commerce.?”?° Thus, accep-
tance and trust are central in the evaluation of new technologies
and should be assessed systematically in the context of ECAs for
medical care. Surprisingly, there is a lack of standardised and
validated scales to rigorously measure these dimensions, in
particular in medicine. '*

Furthermore, engagement, acceptance, and trust do not
depend only on the design of the software but may vary highly
depending on the characteristics of the user. Age, gender,
education, and health conditions of users can influence engage-
ment, acceptance, and trust in technologies but have been
insufficiently studied.2*7° In addition, the impact of the medical
domain covered by the agent (i.e., type of disease targeted) on
engagement, acceptance, and trust in a similar VMA has never
been studied. Therefore, the characteristics of the user and the

 

‘University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. *Clinique du Sommeil, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. *SANPSY, CNRS USR 3413, Bordeaux, France. “Péle addictologie, CH
Charles Perrens and Unité de Soins Complexes d’addictologie (USCA) CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. *email: pierre.philip@u-bordeaux.fr

Scripps Research Translational Institute

np} nature partner

journals
P. Philip et al.

 

medical domain covered by the agent need to be considered
when evaluating a particular technology.

Recently, our team published several articles demonstrating
that ECAs can conduct reliable and valuable clinical interviews and
make psychiatric diagnoses (depression and addiction) in out-
patients seen in a sleep clinic.°””° In addition, we showed that a
VMA was better accepted than a questionnaire displayed on a
tablet to diagnose major depressive disorder (MDD).”° In this new
study, we explored the impact of both the characteristics of the
user and the context of the psychiatric interview covered by the
VMA (for depression or addiction screening) on engagement,
acceptance, and trust, and attempted to determine the threshold
of acceptance and trust in VMAs that are associated with positive
engagement.

RESULTS
Sample characteristics

A total sample of 318 patients were analysed. Patients’
characteristics are summarised in Table 1.

Group comparisons showed no significant differences between
patients included in Study 1 and Study 2 regarding demographic
or sleep disorder characteristics (all p>0.100). We therefore
grouped the two populations to analyse characteristics.

Globally, participants were middle-aged (45.01 years on
average; SD = 13.33), with one third aged over 50 years old.
There was a slightly higher educational level than the French
population average,~” with about half of the participants having a
bachelor’s degree. Most participants suffered from nocturnal
breathing disorders, which matches the prevalence among the
general population.*® Hypersomnia and narcolepsy were also well
represented, with ~10% of our sample suffering from these
disorders. Finally, about a third of participants suffered from non-
organic sleep complaints, such as asymptomatic snoring, transient
insomniac sleep complaints, or sleep hygiene disorders.

Trust, acceptance, and engagement with the VMA

Acceptance and trust data are presented in Fig. 1. Acceptance of
the overall system (score of the AES scale) was rated very

Usability

100
80
60
40

% of patients

20
0 — — = FF

1: Very 2 3 4
unsatisfied

5: Very
satisfied

9

Benevolence
100

80

60
40
20 | |
0 — — —

Not at all

% of patients

Somewhat
agree

Somewhat
disagree

Totally agree

Fig. 1

positively, with 68.2% of patients being “very satisfied” by the
VMA's usability, and 78.1% of patients rating the VMA more than
three out of five for satisfaction. Regarding trust (score on the ETQ
scale), the VMA was perceived as trustworthy to perform medical
interviews. Indeed, 68.2% of patients “totally agreed” that the VMA
was benevolent, and 79.2% of patients rated the VMA more than
two out of three for credibility.

The distribution of patients’ answers to the Engagement
question is presented in Fig. 2. More than half (57.23%) of
outpatients were willing to interact with the VMA in the future,
suggesting a positive engagement with the agent.

Table 1. Sample characteristics.

Total (N= 318)

Age (M (SD))
<30 years (%)
30-50 years (%)
>50 years (%)

45.01 (13.33)
19.9%
38.8%
42.0%
45%

13.36 (2.98)
10.3%
38.6%
50.9%

Gender (% males)
Education (in years) (M (SD))
Middle school (%)

High school (%)

University degree (%)
Type of sleep disorder (%)
42.3%
10.7%
1.9%
1.3%
9.5%
34.4%

Nocturnal breathing disorders
Narcolepsy, hypersomnia
Insufficient sleep syndrome
Periodic leg movements and RLS
Insomnia, ADHD, parasomnia
Non-organic sleep complaints

RLS restless legs syndrome, ADHD attention deficit hyperactivity disorder

 

b. Satisfaction
100
4 80
Cc
60
5
« 40
Oo
o — = FI tt tl
1: Very 2 3 4 5: Very
unsatisfied satisfied
d. Credibility
100
4 80
Cc
60
©
~ 40
Oo
oe [|
; | |
Not at all Somewhat Somewhat Totally agree
disagree agree

Distribution of usability, satisfaction, benevolence, and credibility perception. a percentage of patients’ rating for usability

dimension (AES sub-score), b percentage of patients’ rating for satisfaction dimension (AES sub-score), c percentage of patients’ rating for
benevolence dimension (ETQ sub-score), d percentage of patients’ rating for credibility dimension (ETQ sub-score).

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 2

Scripps Research Translational Institute
FP P BP RN
NYU BB DBD WwW O
(oe © ee © ee © ee)

Number of participants
Re
oO
oO

Yes No

Are you willing to engage in a new interaction with the VMA?

Fig. 2 Distribution of outpatients regarding their perceived
engagement with the VMA.

Influence of patients’ characteristics and VMA interview on
acceptance, trust, and engagement

Regarding usability sub-scores, Pearson correlation analyses
revealed that age was significantly correlated with the usability
sub-score of the AES, with older participants perceiving the system
as easier to use than younger ones (r= 0.143; p=0.11). Mean
comparisons showed that the medical domain covered by the
VMA influences usability (t(316) = —3.385; p = 0.001), and that the
addiction interview is perceived as easier to use than interview
screening for MDD. Other variables (education, gender, sleep
disorder) remained non-significant (all p > 0.200), indicating that
the system was perceived as easy to use irrespective of these user
characteristics. Multivariate analyses (Supplementary Table 1)
confirmed the significant influence of age and medical domain
(F(2,316) = 8.587; p < 0.001).

The satisfaction sub-score was significantly correlated with age
(r = 0.169; p = 0.011) and educational level (r = —0.179; p = 0.001),
older and less-educated participants being more satisfied by the
system than those younger and with a high level of education.
However, users were satisfied by the system regardless of their
gender, sleep disorder or medical domain covered by the VMA (all
p>0.500). Multivariate analyses (Supplementary Table 1) con-
firmed the significant influence of age and education (F(2, 313) =
8.915; p < 0.001).

Concerning trust dimensions, neither credibility sub-score nor
benevolence sub-scores seemed to be influenced by any user
characteristics or type of psychiatric interview conducted by the
VMA. Therefore, we did not perform any multivariate analyses.

Finally, regarding engagement question (“willing to engage in a
new interaction”), mean and distribution comparisons analyses
showed that patients’ engagement varied with regard to VMA
interview (MDD or addiction) (y* (1)= 10.156; p=0.001) and
educational level (t(313) = —1.993; p=0.005). The interview for
depression screening, and a lower level of education were
significant predictors of non-engagement with the ECA. Gender,
type of sleep disorder, and age were not significantly different
between engaged and non-engaged patients. Logistic regression
(Supplementary Table 1) confirmed the significant influence of
medical domain and education (omnibus chi-square = 15.689,
df = 2, p< 0.001).

Acceptance and trust thresholds associated with future
engagement with the VMA

Statistical receiver operating characteristics (ROC) analyses with
the four sub-scores of acceptance and trust (usability, satisfaction,
benevolence, and credibility) are presented in Fig. 3 and
Supplementary Table 2.

Globally, the four scores classified patients efficiently depending
on their future engagement, all area under the curve (AUC) being

Scripps Research Translational Institute

P. Philip et al.

 

100

80

60

Sensitivity

40

— ETQ Credibility
ETQ Benevolence

— AES Satisfaction
AES Usability

20

 

0 20 40 60 80 100
100-Specificity

Fig. 3 ROC curves of the four dimensions of trust and acceptance:
benevolence, credibility, usability, and satisfaction, to classify
engaged and non-engaged subjects.

above 0.650. Analyses revealed cutoff scores of 13.5 and 12.5 for
usability and satisfaction, respectively, and 5.5 and 8.5 for
credibility and benevolence, in order to classify patients engaged
with the VMA. The credibility sub-score of the ETQ obtained
significantly the best classification performance compared with
the other dimensions (all p < 0.100) and showed an AUC of 0.875
(p > 0.001), a cutoff sensitivity of 82.4% and a specificity of 81.3%.

DISCUSSION

The objective of this study was to measure engagement, and
perceived acceptance and trust of VMAs used to diagnose
depression and addiction disorders among outpatients. We
explored the influence of outpatients’ characteristics and type of
medical field covered by the VMA in the variation of engagement,
acceptance, and trust. These findings are very encouraging and
suggest that VMAs could help a wide range of patients. It also
advocates for the consideration of user characteristics and topic of
the medical intervention when designing and evaluating ECAs
usage. At last, we identified acceptance and trust thresholds to
quantify future engagement with the agent.

Taken together, our results show satisfactory levels of accep-
tance and trust independently of the gender, type of sleep
disorders affecting the outpatients, and medical domain covered
by the VMA. Previous studies including gender analyses of
technology acceptance found contradictory results, some high-
lighting differences between men and women in acceptance,'”
whereas others did not.*' Further studies are needed to
investigate the impact of gender of the patient with regard to
the gender of the VMA. There was no significant influence of user
characteristics and medical domain covered by the VMA on
perceived trust, but we observed significant relationships between
age, level of education, and perceived acceptance of the system.
Contrary to common stereotypes that older adults are less likely to
adopt technologies,*? older patients demonstrated greater
acceptance of the system displaying the medical agent. Here
again, internet technologies are now widely deployed among
aging populations to offset the problem of medical deserts and
the loss of autonomy of seniors.*° In addition, several older adults

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 2

np)
P. Philip et al.

 

felt that our VMA was like a companion who could help them to
manage their health in their remotely situated houses. The public
health implications are important, given the aging of the
population worldwide and the growing percentage of older
individuals with chronic diseases.*' Subjects with a low level of
education were more satisfied by our system more than those
with a higher level. The massive development of internet
technologies in all classes of society combined with the wide-
spread availability of “free apps” in the healthcare domain could
explain these results.

Furthermore, most of our patients were willing to interact with
the agent in the future, suggesting positive engagement.
However, we observed that the interview for depression screening
and a lower level of education seemed to favour non-engagement
with the VMA. Reasons for these influences might be that the
conduct of the interview varied between addiction and MDD
screening, the former was based on short structured question-
naires (i.e., the CDS-5 and the CAGE questionnaire), whereas the
latter involves less-structured questions (i.e., based on the DSM-5
criteria). In line with this hypothesis, our results show that the
MDD interview with the VMA was perceived as less easy to use
than the addiction interview. Further studies should investigate
the impact of length and design of the interview on patients’
engagement. In addition, particular attention should be paid to
the interaction scenario implemented by the VMA.

Results of the ROC analyses revealed threshold scores for the
AES and ETQ scores and sub-scores to detect future engaged and
non-engaged users in a clinical setting. This contribution could be
helpful for the earlier detection of disengagement with a VMA,
especially in a long-term autonomous use (e.g., at home for the
follow-up of chronic patients). In particular, we show that the
agent's credibility appropriately classified > 80% of patients, which
suggests that credibility is the most discriminant dimension in
terms of patients’ engagement. This result confirms that VMAs can
be trusted by patients if used in an appropriate clinical context.® It
is in line with findings showing the benefits of therapeutic alliance
between patient and physicians**** and with the suggestion that
alliance with digital mental health apps is crucial for the future.'®
Credibility should therefore be a prime consideration when
designing VMAs, especially for chronic disease management.

To promote the use of VMAs in clinical settings, medical and HCl
experts and regulatory agencies should work together to identify
and adhere to standardised vocabulary, methods for the design** °°
and evaluation®'**’ of digital solutions for healthcare. In the
longer term, this interdisciplinarity would provide the opportunity
to develop VMAs fully compliant with standards and legal aspects,
as stated by the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) in the standard for Human-centred design for Interactive
systems (ISO 9241-210:2019)'”*8 and by several health regulatory
agencies (such as the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence,*’ the National Health Service”; the Medical Research
Council,*' or the European Medicines Agency*’). In the academic
field, among other evaluation models proposed,***° Torous and
colleagues*°**” recently recommended four steps to be met before
including new technological tools can in clinical practice: (1)
consider risk and privacy issues, (2) validate efficacy for health, (3)
ensure engagement, and (4) establish interoperability. By evaluat-
ing acceptance and trust in a VMA, our study conducted in the
context of a psychiatric interview meets the third objective of
Torous’ framework. Further studies are now needed to compare
the validity of the AES and ETQ with that of other evaluation
tools,'*'°*8 whereas keeping in mind the necessity for a common
and _ interdisciplinary vocabulary regarding engagement with
technologies. At last, additional studies need to confirm the
present results over repeated usage of the VMA in the patient's
home. Such studies should investigate the impact of intervention
duration, frequency and learnability, severity, and evolution of
clinical manifestations, the influence of health and technological

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 2

representations by the patients and their professional and
informal caregivers, and modalities of integration in healthcare
systems, in order to promote the involvement of conversational
agents for an efficient patient-centred care.

METHODS

This study follows a quantitative experimental design. Data were collected
during two protocols published previously.®” In study 1,° the objective was
to validate the efficacy of a VMA performing MDD diagnosis. Study 27
focused on the validity of the VMA to perform screening and diagnosis for
tobacco and alcohol use disorders.

Participants

Participants were recruited among outpatients seen at the Sleep Clinic at
the University Hospital of Bordeaux (France) from November 2014 to May
2017. The patient population mirrored the characteristics of a patient
group consulting in general practice with a common referral related to
sleep complaints and a high rate of co-morbidities, including mood
disorders or addiction. They were asked to participate in the study during
their clinical interview by a sleep specialist. Gender, age, education, and
suspected sleep disorders were collected. In all, 179 participants were
recruited for Study 1 (VMA for MDD diagnosis), and 139 were included in
Study 2 (VMA for tobacco and alcohol addiction screening). Patients had to
be aged 18 or older, French native speakers, and have sufficient auditory
and visual aptitude to interact with the VMA. A more-detailed description
of the inclusion and exclusion criteria can be found in ref. °”

This project is part of a larger project on virtual reality and clinical
phenotyping (PHENOVIRT) that has been approved in compliance with
French and European regulations on clinical research by a local ethics
committee (Comité pour la Protection des Personnes—Institutional Review
Board of University of Bordeaux). All participants gave their written
informed consent before entering the study.

VMA description

In study 1, the VMA was developed to conduct a psychiatric interview in
order to evaluate MDD according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorder (DSM-5) criteria. In study 2, the agent was developed to
screen for current alcohol and tobacco use disorders with an adaptation of
the Cigarette Dependence Scale (CDS-5*”) and the CAGE”° questionnaires.
The interaction was based on a pre-determined scenario, with several
options throughout the case depending on the user’s answers but leading
to a single end point. The interviews were adapted by sleep specialists and
computer scientists to reinforce the credibility and benevolence of the
agent, notably by adding small talk and adapting the agent's appearance.
The usability of the system and satisfaction with it were considered in the
design and pre-tested by the research team.

Both VMAs had a female appearance were displayed on a tablet and
talked to the patient with a recorded real voice. The patient could answer
the VMA’s questions orally thanks to voice recognition. The virtual
environment was generated by Unity 3D software (Unity-Technologies,
2014), and gestures were captured by motion capture technology. The
software is based on (Fig. 4): (i) a scenario manager, based on decision
trees, who coordinates the whole interview and manages the other
modules, (ii) a display manager that automatically plays the voice and
animations of the virtual human, (iii) an interaction manager, managing
speech recognition and the graphical interface to respond to the ECA. A
video of our VMA performing an interview can be found in: http://www.
sanpsy.univ-bordeauxsegalen .fr/Papers/NPJ_Additional_Material.html.

Engagement, acceptance, and trust measures

Patients’ perceptions of the VMA were quantified via two questionnaires
evaluating trust in the agent and acceptance of the overall system. We
used short scales to make it time-efficient and usable in clinical practice,
and both questionnaires were answered directly on the tablet after
interacting with the VMA.

Acceptance of the E-health system. To measure acceptance of the system,
we used the Acceptability E-scale.'° This self-reported questionnaire
assessing acceptance of E-health systems comprises six items (Table 2).
The scale comprises a total score and two sub-scores regarding usability
(i.e., the perceived ease of using the system) and satisfaction of the device

Scripps Research Translational Institute
Body and Facial
Movements

Jo

Interview Manager
(Decision Tree)

     
 

 
   
 

Questions

Answer

Answer Statistics Encoding

and Evaluation

Fig. 4 Architecture of the Embodied Conversational Agent.

Table 2.

No. Factor Item

AES items'*!?

Usability How easy was the computer programme to use?

Usability
Satisfaction

How understandable were the questions?

How much did you enjoy using this computer
programme?

Satisfaction
your symptoms and quality of life?

Usability
programme acceptable?

6 Satisfaction
computer programme?

ETQ items

1 Benevolence
by the virtual agent?

Benevolence
were clear?

Benevolence
pleasant?

Credibility
hospital?

Credibility

Credibility Did you feel that the virtual agent was competent?

(i.e., the perceived enjoyment of the use and usefulness of the system).'”'°

Items are based on a five-point Likert scale ranging from 1: “very
unsatisfied”; to 5: “very satisfied”, where higher scores indicate higher
acceptance. This scale was validated in its French version’? in a previous
publication from our team.

Perceived trust in the VMA. Based on the literature,7° ?* we developed a
six-item questionnaire evaluating trust in the VMA (which we named the
ECA Trust Questionnaire, Table 2). Items are based on a four-point Likert
scale ranging from 0: “Not at all” to 3: “Totally agree”, with a total score of
18, higher scores indicating a more favourable attitude toward the agent.
The questionnaire is subdivided into two three-item sub-scores regarding
perceived credibility (i.e., perception that the agent has the ability and the
expertise to conduct a medical intervention) and benevolence of the agent
(i.e., perception that the agent is well-intentioned and will accurately take

Scripps Research Translational Institute

 

Lip Synchronization

Synthetic/Real Voice
~~ Speech Recognition/
Graphic Interface

 

How helpful was this computer programme in describing
Was the amount of time it took to complete this computer

How would you rate your overall satisfaction with this

Did you feel that your answers were correctly understood
Did you feel that the questions asked by the virtual agent
Did you feel that the interview with the virtual agent was

Would you agree to being cared for by the virtual agent in

Would you agree to being cared for by the virtual agent
at home?

P. Philip et al.

Np}

 

3D Rendering Engine

ECA Expressions
and Behaviors

    
 

Vocal
Questions

Subject
answers

English and French versions of the ECA Trust Questionnaire (ETQ) and the Acceptability E-scale (AES).

French version

A quel point avez-vous trouvé ce programme informatique facile
d'utilisation?

A quel point les questions étaient-elles compréhensibles?

A quel point avez-vous apprécié l'utilisation de ce programme
informatique?

A quel point ce programme informatique vous a-t-il été utile pour
décrire vos sympt6émes et votre qualité de vie?

Le temps consacré a répondre a ce programme informatique était-il
acceptable?

Comment évaluez-vous votre satisfaction générale de cet outil
informatique?

Avez-vous eu I'impression que vos reponses ont bien été comprises
par l’agent virtuel?

Est-ce que les questions posées par l’agent virtuel vous ont paru
claires?

Avez-vous trouvé l'entretien avec l’agent virtuel agréable?

Seriez- vous d'accord que l’agent virtuel participe a votre prise en
charge a l'hépital?

Seriez- vous d'accord pour que l’agent virtuel participe a votre prise
en charge a domicile?

Avez-vous eu I'impression que I’agent virtuel était compétent?

 

one’s interests into account), each scored out of 9. To validate the
psychometric properties of the scale, several statistical analyses were
performed. First, to ensure its construct validity, we conducted a principal
component analysis. Results validated breaking down the scale into two
factors (KMO value: .67), Factor 1 (corresponding to credibility) grouping
items 4, 5, and 6; and Factor 2 (corresponding to benevolence) grouping
items 1, 2, and 3 (altogether explaining 61.19% of the variance). Varimax-
rotated factors loading of the ETQ scale are presented in Supplementary
Table 3. To ensure that the ETQ explores factors other than those on the
AES scale, we conducted confirmatory factor analyses on the six items of
the ETQ scale plus the six items of the AES scale with two latent variables
underlying the four sub-scores of ETQ and AES. Root Mean Square Error of
Approximation (RMSEA), Standardised Root Mean Square Residual (SRMR)
and Comparative Fit Index (CFI), indicated an acceptable model fit
(RMSEA = 0.104; SRMR = 0.027; and CFI = 0.988). Second, to ensure the

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 2
Np)

P. Philip et al.

 

internal consistency of the ETQ, Cronbach's alpha coefficients were
calculated. According to Cronbach’s threshold,?' analyses showed
acceptable results (alpha=0.71, and ranging from 0.66 to 0.71 after
removing one item). Finally, floor and ceiling effects measuring the
proportions of participants obtaining the lowest and the highest scores for
each item were calculated to assess the distribution of responses. Obtained
floor effects ranged from 0.6% to 16.0% and ceiling effects ranged from
14.5% to 61.0%. Taken together, these analyses suggest that the scale has
satisfactory psychometric properties.

Future engagement with the VMA._ To estimate patients’ willingness to stay
engaged with the VMA during repetitive use, we administered one two-
choice question: “Are you willing to engage in a new interaction with the
virtual medical agent?” after the interview with the VMA. Patients could
answer “Yes” or “No”. We refer hereafter to this question as the
“Engagement question”.

Statistical analyses

Quantitative variables were expressed with means (M), and standard
deviations (SD), and qualitative variables were expressed using distribu-
tions and percentages. To investigate factors associated with acceptance
(usability and satisfaction sub-scores of the AES), trust (credibility and
benevolence sub-scores of the ETQ) and engagement (answer to
Engagement question), we conducted univariate analyses with Pearson
correlation analyses between two continuous variables (age, education,
AES sub-scores, ETQ sub-scores), mean comparisons (t test or analysis of
variances) for categorical variables (gender, type of sleep disorder, medical
domain of the agent) and distribution comparisons (y” tests) when both
variables are categorical (when comparison is based on the Engagement
question). When associations appeared significant (p < 0.05), we conducted
multivariate analyses using linear regressions for AES et ETQ sub-scores as
dependent variables, and using logistic regressions for Engagement
question as the dependent variable.

At last, to identify acceptance and trust thresholds that would induce
future patients to engage with the system, we performed ROC analyses
using AES and ETQ sub-scores as parameters, and the Engagement
question as binary classifier. For these analyses, AUC, sensitivity/specificity
and positive/negative predictive reports were presented. A cutoff point
was obtained by selecting the point on the ROC curve that maximised
both sensitivity and specificity. Analyses were performed using SPSS
software (version 18, PASW Statistics), RStudio (version 1.2.1335, RStudio
Inc) and MedCalc (version 14.8 for Windows).

Reporting summary

Further information on experimental design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding
author upon reasonable request.

Received: 10 July 2019; Accepted: 2 December 2019;
Published online: 07 January 2020

REFERENCES

1. Wykes, T. et al. Mental health research priorities for Europe. Lancet Psychiatry 2,
1036-1042 (2015).

2. Laranjo, L. et al. Conversational agents in healthcare: a systematic review. J. Am.
Med. Inform. Assoc. 25, 1248-1258 (2018).

3. Provoost, S., Lau, H. M., Ruwaard, J. & Riper, H. Embodied Conversational Agents
in Clinical Psychology: A Scoping Review. J. Med. Internet Res. 19, e151 (2017).

4. Vaidyam, A. N., Wisniewski, H., Halamka, J. D., Kashavan, M. S. & Torous, J. B.
Chatbots and Conversational Agents in Mental Health: A Review of the Psy-
chiatric Landscape. Can. J. Psychiatry 0706743719828977 (2019). https://doi.org/
10.1177/0706743719828977.

5. Cassell, J. et al. Animated Conversation: Rule-based Generation of Facial
Expression, Gesture & Spoken Intonation for Multiple Conversational Agents. in
Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques 413-420 (ACM, 1994). https://doi.org/10.1145/192161.192272.

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 2

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

. Philip, P. et al. Virtual human as a new diagnostic tool, a proof of concept study in

the field of major depressive disorders. Sci. Rep. 7, 42656 (2017).

. Auriacombe, M. et al. Development and validation of a virtual agent to screen

tobacco and alcohol use disorders. Drug Alcohol Depend. 193, 1-6 (2018).

. Lucas, G. M. et al. Reporting Mental Health Symptoms: Breaking Down Barriers to

Care with Virtual Human Interviewers. Front. Robot. Al 4, 51 (2017).

. Lisetti, C., Amini, R., Yasavur, U. & Rishe, N. | Can Help You Change! An Empathic

Virtual Agent Delivers Behavior Change Health Interventions. ACM Trans. Manag.
Inf. Syst. 4, 1-19 (2013).

Ren, J., Bickmore, T., Hempstead, M. & Jack, B. Birth Control, Drug Abuse, or
Domestic Violence? What Health Risk Topics Are Women Willing to Discuss with a
Virtual Agent? in Intelligent Virtual Agents (eds. Bickmore, T., Marsella, S. & Sidner,
C.) 350-359 (Springer International Publishing, 2014).

Hopkins, |. M. et al. Avatar Assistant: Improving Social Skills in Students with an
ASD Through a Computer-Based Intervention. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 41,
1543-1555 (2011).

Bickmore, T. W. et al. Managing Chronic Conditions with a Smartphone-based
Conversational Virtual Agent. in Proceedings of the 18th International Conference
on Intelligent Virtual Agents - IVA ‘18 119-124 (ACM Press, 2018). https://doi.org/
10.1145/3267851.3267908.

Henson, P., Wisniewski, H., Hollis, C., Keshavan, M. & Torous, J. Digital mental
health apps and the therapeutic alliance: initial review. BJPsych Open 5, e15 (2019).
Bhugra, D. et al. The WPA- Lancet Psychiatry Commission on the Future of Psy-
chiatry. Lancet Psychiatry 4, 775-818 (2017).

Tariman, J. D., Berry, D. L., Halpenny, B., Wolpin, S. & Schepp, K. Validation and
testing of the Acceptability E-scale for Web-based patient-reported outcomes in
cancer care. Appl. Nurs. Res. 24, 53-58 (2011).

Davis, F. D. Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and User Acceptance of
Information Technology. MIS Q. 13, 319-340 (1989).

Bevan, N., et al. Standards for Usability, Usability Reports and Usability Measures.
in Human-Computer Interaction. Theory, Design, Development and Practice (ed.
Kurosu, M.) 268-278 (Springer International Publishing, 2016).

Heerink, M., Krdse, B., Evers, V. & Wielinga, B. Assessing Acceptance of Assistive
Social Agent Technology by Older Adults: the Almere Model. Int. J. Soc. Robot. 2,
361-375 (2010).

Micoulaud-Franchi, J.-A. et al. Validation of the French version of the Acceptability
E-scale (AES) for mental E-health systems. Psychiatry Res. 237, 196-200 (2016).
Cassell, J. & Bickmore, T. External Manifestations of Trustworthiness in the
Interface. Commun. ACM 43, 7 (2000).

Zhang, M., Luo, M., Nie, R. & Zhang, Y. Technical attributes, health attribute,
consumer attributes and their roles in adoption intention of healthcare wearable
technology. Int. J. Med. Inf. 108, 97-109 (2017).

Benbasat, |. & Wang, W. Trust In and Adoption of Online Recommendation
Agents. J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 6, 4 (2005).

Pavlou, P. A. Consumer Acceptance of Electronic Commerce: Integrating Trust
and Risk with the Technology Acceptance Model. Int. J. Electron. Commer. 7,
101-134 (2003).

Chen, K. & Chan, A. H. S. Gerontechnology acceptance by elderly Hong Kong Chi-
nese: a senior technology acceptance model (STAM). Ergonomics 57, 635-652 (2014).
Micoulaud-Franchi, J.-A. et al. Acceptability of Embodied Conversational Agent in
a Health Care Context. in /ntelligent Virtual Agents (eds. Traum, D. et al.) 416-419
(Springer International Publishing, 2016).

Philip, P., Bioulac, S., Sauteraud, A., Chaufton, C. & Olive, J. Could a Virtual Human
Be Used to Explore Excessive Daytime Sleepiness in Patients? Presence Tele-
operators Virtual Environ. 23, 369-376 (2014).

Lacour, C. Les dipl6més du supérieur en Aquitaine: la région profite de son
attractivité (2015).

Lévy, P. et al. Obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome. Nat. Rev. Dis. Prim. 1, 15015
(2015).

Durick, J., Robertson, T., Brereton, M., Vetere, F. & Nansen, B. Dispelling Ageing
Myths in Technology Design. in Proceedings of the 25th Australian Computer-
Human Interaction Conference: Augmentation, Application, Innovation, Collabora-
tion 467-476 (ACM, 2013). https://doi.org/10.1145/2541016.2541040.
Chouvarda, |. G., Goulis, D. G., Lambrinoudaki, |. & Maglaveras, N. Connected
health and integrated care: Toward new models for chronic disease manage-
ment. Maturitas 82, 22-27 (2015).

World Health Organization. World Report on Ageing and Health. (World Health
Organization, 2015).

Suchman, A. L. & Matthews, D. A. What makes the patient-doctor relationship
therapeutic? Exploring the connexional dimension of medical care. Ann. Intern.
Med. 108, 125-130 (1988).

Ardito, R. B. & Rabellino, D. Therapeutic Alliance and Outcome of Psychotherapy:
Historical Excursus, Measurements, and Prospects for Research. Front. Psychol. 2,
270 (2011).

Preece, J. et al. Human-Computer Interaction. (Addison-Wesley Longman Ltd., 1994).

Scripps Research Translational Institute
35. Torous, J. et al. Creating a Digital Health Smartphone App and Digital Pheno-
typing Platform for Mental Health and Diverse Healthcare Needs: an Inter-
disciplinary and Collaborative Approach. J. Technol. Behav. Sci. 4, 73-85 (2019).

36. Gracey, L. E. et al. Use of user-centered design to create a smartphone application
for patient-reported outcomes in atopic dermatitis. Npj Digit. Med. 1, 33 (2018).

37. Ata, R. et al. Clinical validation of smartphone-based activity tracking in peripheral
artery disease patients. Npj Digit. Med. 1, 66 (2018).

38. ISO 9241-210:2019. Ergonomics of human-system interaction — Part 210: Human-
centred design for interactive systems. (2019).

39. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. NICE digital. NICE https://www.
nice.org.uk/digital.

40. NHS England. Digital transformation. https://www.england.nhs.uk/digitaltechnology/.

41. Medical Research Council. Methods research to support the assessment of
diagnostic health technologies. https://mrc.ukri.org/funding/how-we-fund-
research/opportunities/methods-research-to-support-the-assessment-of-
diagnostic-health-technologies/ (2018).

42. European Medicines Agency. Big data. https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/about-us/
how-we-work/big-data (2019).

43. King, M. R. N., Rothberg, S., Dawson, R. & Batmaz, F. Bridging the edtech evidence
gap: A realist evaluation framework refined for complex technology initiatives. (2016).

44. Wolverton, C. C. & Lanier, P. A. Utilizing the Technology-Organization-
Environment Framework to Examine the Adoption Decision in a Healthcare
Context. Handb. Res. Evol. IT Rise E-Soc. 401-423 (2019). https://doi.org/10.4018/
978-1-5225-7214-5.ch018.

45. Sittig, D. F. & Singh, H. A New Socio-technical Model for Studying Health Infor-
mation Technology in Complex Adaptive Healthcare Systems. Qual. Saf. Health
Care 19, i68-i74 (2010).

46. Torous, J. B. et al. A Hierarchical Framework for Evaluation and Informed Decision
Making Regarding Smartphone Apps for Clinical Care. Psychiatr. Serv. 69, 498-500
(2018).

47. Torous, J. et al. The Emerging Imperative for a Consensus Approach Toward the
Rating and Clinical Recommendation of Mental Health Apps. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis.
206, 662-666 (2018).

48. Venkatesh, V. & Davis, F. D. A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Accep-
tance Model: Four Longitudinal. Field Stud. Manag. Sci. 46, 186-204 (2000).

49. Etter, J.-F., Houezec, J. L. & Perneger, T. V. A Self-Administered Questionnaire to
Measure Dependence on Cigarettes: The Cigarette Dependence Scale. Neu-
ropsychopharmacology 28, 359 (2003).

50. Bush, B., Shaw, S., Cleary, P., Delbanco, T. L. & Aronson, M. D. Screening for alcohol
abuse using the cage questionnaire. Am. J. Med. 82, 231-235 (1987).

51. Cronbach, L. J. Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests. Psychometrika
16, 297-334 (1951).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This project was supported by the national grants LABEX BRAIN (ANR-10-LABX-43),
EQUIPEX PHENOVIRT (ANR-10-EQPX-01), and IDEX (ANR-10-IDEX-03-02). We thank the

Scripps Research Translational Institute

P. Philip et al.

Np}

 

outpatients at the Sleep Clinic who took time to test our virtual medical agent and
gave us precious feedback.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

L.D., J.A.M., and P.P., wrote the manuscript. L.D. performed the statistical analyses on
the collected data. E.D.S. developed and tested the virtual medical agent. J.A.M., A.S.,
M.A., and P.P., conceived and designed the study. F.S. and A.S., ran the protocol and
acquired all the data for the study. P.P. is the principal investigator in charge of
the study.

COMPETING INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing interests.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
541746-019-0213-y.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to P.P.

Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons

EY Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.

© The Author(s) 2020

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 2
