International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 144 (2020) 102500

 

          
 

BW Contents lists available at ScienceDirect =a
es e Re =e
WE eT

Studies

| International Journal of Human-Computer Studies
ae : >
ELSEVIER

 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijhcs

 

Sonification of the self vs. sonification of the other: Differences in the ®

Check for

sonification of performed vs. observed simple hand movements updates

 

Roberto Bresin’’*, Maurizio Mancini”, Ludvig Elblaus*, Emma Frid*

* KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
b University College Cork, Cork, Ireland

 

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

 

 

Keywords: Existing works on interactive sonification of movements, i.e., the translation of human movement qualities from
Sonification the physical to the auditory domain, usually adopt a predetermined approach: the way in which movement
Mapping features modulate the characteristics of sound is fixed. In our work we want to go one step further and de-
Hand movement monstrate that the user role can influence the tuning of the mapping between movement cues and sound
reormance parameters. Here, we aim to verify if and how the mapping changes when the user is either the performer or the

observer of a series of body movements (tracing a square or an infinite shape with the hand in the air). We asked
participants to tune movement sonification while they were directly performing the sonified movement vs. while
watching another person performing the movement and listening to its sonification. Results show that the tuning
of the sonification chosen by participants is influenced by three variables: role of the user (performer vs ob-
server), movement quality (the amount of Smoothness and Directness in the movement), and physical para-
meters of the movements (velocity and acceleration). Performers focused more on the quality of their movement,
while observers focused more on the sonic rendering, making it more expressive and more connected to low-

level physical features.

 

1. Introduction

Movement sonification is the translation of human movement qua-
lities (e.g., amplitude, speed) from the physical to the auditory domain
(see Dubus and Bresin, 2013 for an overview). Such a translation can be
achieved, for example, through a direct mapping between movement
and audio features. An “optimal” mapping will effectively communicate
the same meaning across performers (i.e., humans performing dance
movements) and listeners (i.e., humans listening to the resulting
translation in the auditory domain). The goal of the present paper is to
provide insights in the design of effective movement-to-sound map-
pings. In particular, we hypothesize that the interactive sonification
mapping (Hunt and Hermann, 2011) designed by a person who is
performing the sonified movement will be different, in general, from
the one designed by a person who is just listening to the sonification. In
other words, we aim to answer to the following question: in interactive
sonification, will the mapping between movement and sound be dif-
ferent if it is designed by the person actually performing the sonified
movement vs. being designed by the person who is observing/listening
the same sonified movement?

We know from previous research on the analysis of gestures in

* Corresponding author

music performance that body and instrument constrains can influence
both expressive performances and musicians’ body movements
(Dahl et al., 2009), and that we can consider music performers as ex-
perts in translating gestures into sounds (God@y et al., 2005). In a
previous work on the execution of legato piano performances, Repp
(1995, 1997) demonstrated that participants perform differently when
playing the piano themselves (performing condition) versus controlling
the note duration of the same pre-recorded note sequence (listening
condition). In both conditions, participants were asked to perform an
optimal minimal and maximal legato. In piano performance legato ar-
ticulation is commonly achieved by keeping the keys corresponding to
two consecutive legato notes pressed for a short time interval called
“Key-Overlap Time”(KOT). Repp found that performers used larger
KOTs than listeners, and that KOTs tend to be negative (corresponding
to the absence of physical overlapping of the piano keys) for minimal
optimal legato and for keys corresponding to low frequencies, since
their corresponding tones had a longer decay time perceptually corre-
sponding to an acoustic legato. A possible explanation is that when
controlling the pre-recorded sequence, participants cognitively focused
on the acoustic feedback only, while when performing the legato pia-
nists focused more on the physical action that produces both the

E-mail addresses: roberto@kth.se (R. Bresin), m.mancini@cs.ucc.ie (M. Mancini), elblaus@kth.se (L. Elblaus), emmafrid@kth.se (E. Frid).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2020.102500

Received 16 June 2019; Received in revised form 16 June 2020; Accepted 18 June 2020

Available online 20 June 2020

1071-5819/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license

(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).
R. Bresin, et al.

mechanical overlap of piano keys and the acoustic overlap of their
corresponding sounds.

Other previous works on the expression and recognition of emotions
in both speech and music showed that the Brunswikian Lens Model
(Brunswick, 1956) has been “used in several fields to study how ob-
servers correctly and incorrectly use objective cues to perceive physical
or social reality” (Juslin and Timmers, 2010; Scherer, 1978). In parti-
cular, in music performance, performers and listeners can use cues from
the same set of acoustical, haptic, and visual cues in different ways
when communicating and decoding expression, respectively (Juslin and
Timmers, 2010). In a previous study, we found a small but significant
effect of movement-to-sound mapping on movement qualities (energy,
smoothness, directness), that changed depending on the sound model
(Frid et al., 2016).

In this paper we aim to test whether or not a sonification model is
tuned differently by participants driving the sonification with their own
movement, compared to participants who sonify the movement per-
formed by another person they are observing. In addition, we want to
investigate if the tuning of this sonification depends also on the quality
of the movements. In particular, we aim to confirm (or deny) the fol-
lowing research hypotheses:

H1 - Effect of condition on sound parameters: people tune sound
parameters of an interactive movement sonification model differ-
ently, in terms of the use of one or more parameters, when per-
forming a movement themselves vs. when they are observing an-
other person performing a movement. More in detail, we expect that
the observer will adjust the sound parameters for highlighting some
of the characteristics of the observed movements, while the sonifi-
cation made by the performer will be more homogeneous.

H2 - Effect of movement on sound parameters: The type of
movement (e.g., a smooth curved trajectory vs. a jerky straight one)
influences the way people tune sound parameters. In particular, we
expect smooth movements to be sonified with more dull and low
frequent sounds, while jerky trajectories will be portrayed with
sounds characterized by higher frequencies and louder sound level.

In other words, we hypothesize that, like in Repp’s studies (Repp,
1995; 1997), participants will focus more on physical actions when
performing the movement themselves, compared to when they only
observe the performed movements.

2. Experiment
2.1. Experimental design

The experimental setting used in our study is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Participants were randomly assigned to two groups: the Performance
Group (PG) and Observation Group (OG). Each group was assigned to
one of two adjoining rooms, separated by a one-way mirror, as illu-
strated in Fig. 1. Participants in the OG group were assigned to the
Observation Room (OR) and could observe participants in the PG
group, who were assigned to the Performance Room (PR). PG partici-
pants in the PR room could not observe OG participants in the OR room.
Both rooms had an identical setup consisting of a computer with
headphones and a multi-touch tablet with sliders.

2.1.1. Performance room

PG participants performed their task in the PR room. The room was
equipped with a motion capture system, and participants were fitted
with a set of motion capture markers that they were holding with their
dominant hand (see Fig. 2).

The equipment used in this room consisted of:

- 1 computer displaying instructions and showing the two different
hand movements to be performed by participants in the PR room.

International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 144 (2020) 102500

The two movements represented the shapes of a square and an in-
finity symbol, respectively’).

- 1 server computer for running the motion capture software system
(Arena software’), logging the motion capture data, and streaming
movement low-level features to the client computers in the PR and
OR in real-time.

- 1 client computer running software for real-time sound synthesis
(implemented with SuperCollider®), connected via USB to a tablet
running a four-slider interface (implemented with TouchOSC’) used
for manipulating the sound synthesis and logging the slider data
incoming from the tablet. The client software also controlled the
GUI on the tablets (e.g., activating specific sliders), provided func-
tions for proceeding to the next stage of the experiment (this was
manually controlled by the experiment supervisor, see Section 2.3),
and implemented the routine for pacing the experiment (e.g., of
trials), as controlled by the experimenter.

- 1 pair of Beyer Dynamic DT770 Pro headphones, worn by PG par-
ticipants.

- 1 video camera that was used for recording each PG participant.

2.1.2. Observation room

The room was equipped with a one-way mirror that enabled OG
participants to observe the movements performed by PG participants in
the PR room. The equipment used in this room was:

1 computer displaying the same instructions as in the PR room.

- 1 computer with identical client setup as the computer in the PR
room.

- 1 pair of identical headphones as in the PR room.

- 1 video camera that was used for recording each OG participant.

2.2. Participants

A total of 25 people took part in the experiment (14F, 11M;
Mean = 22.88 years, SD = 2.89). Participants were students of the
Degree Programme in Media Technology at KTH Royal Institute of
Technology. The experiment was performed during three days. The
experiment lasted 25 min, on average.

2.3. Procedure

The 25 participants were divided into two groups: 14 PG partici-
pants (7F, 7M), and 11 OG participants (7F, 4M), for a total of 11 pairs,
and 3 single participants in the PR (2M, 1F). For each observer/per-
former pair of participants, the entrance to the respective room took
place at separate times.

Each PG participant, whose arm movements had to be sonified, was
holding a wand with her/his dominant hand. The wand comprised a
handle similar to that of a screw driver and included reflective markers
on its top (see Fig. 2). We chose not to have markers placed directly on
the hand of participants in order to force them to produce very similar
movements between each participant and consequently to have a re-
duced number of degrees of freedom in the movements. The markers
were tracked in 3D space with an OptiTrack motion capture system by
Natural Point.° Three low-level movement features were computed in
realtime: (1) velocity of the user’s hand, obtained by differentiating
positional data; (2) acceleration, obtained by differentiating velocity;
(3) jerk, obtained by differentiating acceleration. Low-level movement
features were used in the sonification process presented in next

' The video can be found here: https://kth.box.com/v/DANCE2018
? https://optitrack.com/support/software/arena.html

3 https://supercollider.github.io

* https://hexler.net/software/touchosc

> http://optitrack.com/products/flex-3
R. Bresin, et al.

one way mirror
Observation Room

 

sonification 2

Performance Room

mocap data }

sonification 1

International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 144 (2020) 102500

Fig. 1. A schematization of the experimental setting.
Participants (performer and observer) are standing in
two rooms separated by a one way mirror, so that the
performer can be seen by the observer, while the op-
posite is not possible. A server computer receives the
performer’s motion capture data (i.e., the dominant
hand position in space) and computes movement fea-
tures, such as speed and acceleration, which are
streamed to two client computers located in the two
rooms. Both the performer and the observer can move
four sliders displayed on a tablet. The sliders drive the
movement sonification generated by the two client
computers in each room.

server

movement features

Fig. 2. The wand held by each PG participant with her/his dominant hand. The
wand consisted of a handle similar to that of a screw driver, provided with
reflective markers on its top.

sections.

Both PG and OG participants were presented with a set of four di-
gital sliders on a multi-touch tablet computer (an Apple iPAD running
TouchOSC), where each slider represented a weighting parameter for
mapping a low-level movement feature to an audio feature, as pre-
sented in Table 1 (according to mappings reported in Dubus and
Bresin (2013)) and implemented as explained in Section 2.4 (see Fig. 3

Table 1

 

for a screenshot of the interface). For each participant, the starting
position of each slider was automatically set to the middle of the scale,
which corresponds to a 0 weight, i.e., no mapping. If a slider was set to
its top position, i.e., its weight was set to 1, a full positive mapping
would be used, that is, a high value in the movement’s low-level feature
will create a high value in the audio feature, according to the most
commonly used polarizations used in previous studies (as reported in
Dubus and Bresin (2013)). If the slider was set to its bottom position,
the weight was set to —1, meaning that a full negative mapping would
be used, i.e., the opposite of the most common polarizations. Between
these endpoints, a fractional value representing a weight between —1
and 1 was associated with the position of the slider.

Participants received instructions by email one week prior to par-
ticipating in the experiment, so that they could familiarize with the
experiment procedure (full texts of the instructions are available in the
annexes).

PG participants were instructed to perform the same sequence of
movements as in a video presented on a monitor in front of them by
moving approximately at the same speed as the person in the video.
While doing their movements they had to adjust the slider(s) on a iPad
so that the sound was affected by their movement in a way that they felt
to be appropriate. They stopped when they were satisfied with the
obtained sounds.

OG participants were instructed to observe through one-way mirror
the movements performed by the PG participant in the other room.
They were asked to adjust the slider(s) on an iPad until they felt that the
sound affected by the movements of the PG participant was appro-
priate.

On the day of the experiment participants were asked to read the
instructions again and fill out a consent form. Participants could ask
questions to the instructors, if they had any. Once both participants
were ready, the order of the sliders was randomly assigned to a
synthesis parameter and the experiment started. It was organized ac-
cording to the following six stages:

The four movement features associated with the corresponding manipulated audio features and related mappings (as described in Dubus and Bresin, 2013).

Movement feature Audio feature
Velocity of the user’s dominant hand Pitch
Velocity of the user’s dominant hand
Acceleration of the user’s dominant hand

Acceleration of the user’s dominant hand Amplitude

Timbre and spectral slope
Periodicity of the sound

Mapping type

Low/high velocity to low/high pitch

Low/high velocity to dark/bright timbre
Low/high acceleration to periodic/aperiodic sound
Low/high acceleration to low/high amplitude
R. Bresin, et al.

International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 144 (2020) 102500

 

Fig. 3. Screenshot of the slider interface that was running on the tablet computers. The interface was the same for both PG and OG participants. The user interface

was designed using black and grey not to distract participants with colours.

e Stages 1-4: Participants in both PG and OG groups controlled one
slider at a time (Slider 1 during stage 1, Slider 2 during stage 2, and
so on). At the beginning of each stage, all sliders were reset to the
middle position. When both participants indicated that they were
satisfied with the result, the experiment continued to the next phase
(this was iterated for all four sliders).

If participant in the PR room was satisfied with the sound before the
participant in the OR room, the PR participant had to continue
moving until OR participant was done.

e Stage 5: Both participants could modify all sliders at the same time.
As for stages 1-4, they indicated when they were satisfied with the
result.

e Stage 6: PR participant only was asked to repeat the movements
until the instructor asked her/him to stop (approximately three
iterations of the movement sequences). This was done to record
audio of each participant’s final sounds.

At the end of the experiment, both PG and OG participants exited
the experiment rooms and were asked to fill out an online questionnaire
about their participation.

The questionnaire was realized with the Survey Gizmo platform®.
For the complete list of questions asked to participants please see the
attached Annex Questionnaire.

2.4. Mapping movement to sound features

Participants in both groups could interactively tune the sonification
of the movements produced by PG participants in the PR room by
moving the sliders on the tablet.

The code used for generating the sounds for both PG add OG par-
ticipants was written in SuperCollider.’

In the following sections we present the mapping between low-level
movement features and sound features associated with each of the four
sliders. The value of each slider was normalized between —1 and 1,

6 https://www.surveygizmo.com
” The code is available here https://kth.box.com/v/DANCE2018

where 0 corresponded to neutral behavior of the sound models.

2.4.1. Slider 1 - s1

Slider s1 mapped the velocity of movements to the fundamental
frequency (FO) used in the sound models, according to the following
rule:

- if the velocity of movement is equal to 0, then FO = 600 Hz;
- if the velocity of movement is greater than 0, then FO is in the range
[20, 20000] Hz depending on the value of the slider.

The Super Collider code that mapped the value of s1 to FO was:
£0 = (600 + (sl * velocity * 600)).clip(20, 20000)

2.4.2. Slider 2 - s2
Slider s2 mapped the velocity of movement to the timbre used in the

sound model, according to the following definition (written in Super
Collider):

timbre = (0.5 + (s2* 0.5 * velocity)) * 2.0

The resulting waveform used for the sound synthesis will be one of
the following:

- sinusoid, if timbre = 0;
- triangle, if timbre = 1;
- sawtooth, if timbre = 2;

according to the following Super Collider code considering s2 value,
and selecting the sound model sig:

Sig = SelectX.ar(timbre, [SinOsc.ar(f0), LPF.ar
(LFTri.ar(f£0), 11250), Saw.ar (£0) ])

For values of timbre between 0 and 1, the resulting waveform will
be a sinusoid cross-faded to a triangle waveform, and for values be-
tween 1 and 2, the waveform will be a triangle cross-faded to a
R. Bresin, et al.

Table 2

Statistics (mean, median, standard deviation, 95% confidence lower and upper
bound) of the two movement features Smoothness Index (SI) and Directness
Index (DI) computed on the infinite and square movements separately (all PG
participants).

ul x o lower upper
SI-square 0.05 0.00 0.02 0.02 0.08
DI-square 0.63 0.65 0.03 0.49 0.61
SI-infinite 0.29 0.18 0.09 0.13 0.31
DI-infinite 0.36 0.34 0.04 0.29 0.43

sawtooth.

2.4.3. Slider 3 - s3

The value of slider s3 mapped the acceleration of movements to the
variations of the fundamental frequency (FO) determined by the posi-
tion of s1. Low values of acceleration corresponded to small variations
of FO, while high values of acceleration corresponded to large variations
of FO. Frequency variations were produced by adding random values to
FO depending on the acceleration, as defined by the following Super
Collider code:

fO0 = £0 + LPF.ar(LFDNoise3.ar(f0, £0 * s3 * accelera-
tion), (£0 * 8).clip(800, 16000) )

2.4.4. Slider 4 - s4

The value of slider s4 mapped the acceleration of movements to the
variations of the sound level of the waveform determined by the posi-
tion of s2. The resulting sound level is updated depending on the value
of s4 and of the acceleration, according to the following Super Collider
code:

Sig = (sig * (1 -s4)) + (sig * s4 * acceleration * 4)

As aresult, when s4 is left in its default position (s4 = 0), the sound
level of the waveform is unvaried, while values greater than or less then
0 correspond to higher or lower sound level when acceleration is re-
spectively larger or smaller.

All motion capture recordings and movements of the sliders for all
participants were logged and saved for further analysis.

3. Analysis and results

Due to technical reasons, the data of 5 participants had to be dis-
regarded. As a consequence, the total number of participants used in the
analysis presented in the following sections was 20 (9F, 11M;
Mean = 23 years, SD = 3.15), corresponding to 11 PG (4F, 7M) versus
9 OG participants (5F, 4M).

3.1. Movement features

In order to validate the movements performed by participants and
also to investigate whether or not there was a correlation between
movement characteristics and the sonification mappings that were set
up by participants, we extracted 2 movement features on PG partici-
pants’ dominant hand trajectory: the Smoothness Index (SI) and the
Directness Index (DI). These features belong to layers 2 (SI) and 3 (DI) of
the movement analysis framework described in Camurri et al. (2016).
The framework consists of four layers, ranging from physical low-level
signals (layer 1), to body joint movement (layer 2), to gesture (layer 3)
and high-level qualities (layer 4). A detailed description of the frame-
work is out of the scope of this paper. The two movement features have
been chosen since they are related to the movement (SI) and gesture
shape (DI) (Camurri et al., 2016). This is in line with the instructions
provided to participants, as they were asked to focus on the shape and

International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 144 (2020) 102500

pace of two sample trajectories that were shown to them in a video
before starting the experiment (see Section 2.3).

SI indicates how much a body joint (e.g., the user’s dominant hand)
is moving according to the specific laws of bio-mechanics defining
smoothness, see Mazzarino and Mancini (2009), Hogan and
Sternad (2007). SI has been described in the experiment in
Frid et al. (2016), showing that it can be successfully exploited to sonify
the trajectories of a group of children moving in a space monitored by a
motion capture system. DI describes the shape of the trajectory of a
body joint in reaching a target position in terms of directness vs. flex-
ibility (Volpe and Camurri, 2011). Together with other movement mid-
level features, it has been exploited in Ghisio et al. (2015) to create
serious games using interactive sonification of movement in the re-
habilitation of children with motor and cognitive impairment.

3.2. Movement features extraction

Movement features have been extracted on the movements per-
formed by PG participants during stage 5 of the experiment, in which
they performed the two sample movements (i.e., the infinite and the
square) and adjusted all the four mapping sliders to the position re-
sulting in the desired final sonic feedback. For each one of 11 PG par-
ticipants, we manually segmented infinite and square movements. A
segment corresponded to a sequence of consecutive movements of the
same type (infinite or square), labeled by its type. Then, we auto-
matically extracted SI and DI on the resulting 144 infinite and 113
square segments.

We computed the mean, median, standard deviation, variance and
confidence intervals of SI and DI on all the segments. Table 2 reports
these values for infinite and square segments separately. Then, we
performed a paired two-tailed t test by comparing the values of SI and
DI in square and infinite movements. The test showed significant dif-
ferences (p < 0.001) between square and infinite movements, in terms
of both SI and DI. As reported in Table 2, SI is higher in infinite
movements, while DI is higher in square movements. This is true across
all participants (see also Figs. 4, 5 and 6), with a confidence level of
95% and a low standard deviation.

Fig. 7 illustrates two examples of infinite (above) and square
(below) segments, belonging to PG participants 3 and 8. The trajec-
tories in the figure visually demonstrate the consistence between con-
secutive movements performed by participants.

Sound examples relative to the movements plotted in Figure 7 for
both PG add OG participants can be found at the following link: https://
kth.box.com/v/DANCE2018.

@ Infinite
@ Square

So
co

o
oO

Mean SI +- SD
So ©
NO aS

ytdet,

-0.2

 

123 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011
Participant

Fig. 4. Mean Smoothness Index (SI) computed per participant performing ei-
ther the infinite or the square movement.
R. Bresin, et al.

1

@ Infinite
@ Square

2
Co

2
oO

Mean DI +- SD
© ©
N S

oO

 

-0.2
123 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011

Participant

Fig. 5. Mean Directness Index (DI) computed per participant performing either
the infinite or the square movement.

0.87

 

® infinite

 

 

0.7 # square

 

= >
$

0.6

0.3/ e@ @

0.17

 

O |
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8

Sl

Fig. 6. Mean Smoothness Index (SI) and Directness Index (DI) computed on
participants performing either the infinite (circle) or the square (diamond)
movement. The graph clearly shows that we can identify two movement clus-
ters in terms of SI and DI mean values.

3.3. Manipulation of sound model control parameters

The values assigned to each of the four sliders for the two groups of
participants were analyzed to verify if participants made different
choices in their sound settings (hypothesis H1), and if the sounds set-
tings were correlated with specific mid-level movement features (hy-
pothesis H2).

Each slider indirectly represented the question “How much (if any)
influence do you think movement feature x should have on audio fea-
ture y?” which can provide an answer to hypothesis H1. The audio
features are archetypal high-level characteristics that could be applied
to a large number of sound models, making the results generalizable.

In Fig. 8 the medians, 25 and 75 percentiles for each slider are
presented for the two groups, PG and OG respectively.

In order to verify the existence of different strategies for the control
of sonification by the two groups of participants, we ran Pearson cor-
relation tests between the final values of the sliders and the mean and
median of the motion quality parameters for each group.

Performer Group (PG): Participants who made the sonification of own
movements

International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 144 (2020) 102500

C1 Values of slider s1 showed a significant negative correlation with
the mean of SI of the infinite movement (r(11) = —.625, 95% CI,
p < 0.05).

C2 Slider s1 showed a significant negative correlation with the variance
of DI of the square movement (r(11) = —.603, 95% CI, p < 0.05).

C3 Slider s2 showed a significant positive correlation with slider s3
(r(11) = 0.616, 95% CI, p < 0.05).

C4 Slider s4 showed a significant positive correlation with the variance
of SI of the infinite movement (r(11) = 0.629, 95% CI, p < 0.05).

Observer Group (OG): Participants who made the sonification observing
the movement made by another participant

C5 Slider s1 showed a significant negative correlation with slider s4
(r(9) = —0.723, 95% CI, p < 0.05).

C6 Slider s1 showed a significant negative correlation with the mean
velocity of the square movement (7 (9) = —0.678, 95% CI, p < 0.05).

C7 Slider s4 showed a significant positive correlation with the standard
deviation of DI of the square movement (r(9) = 0.678, 95% CI,
p < 0.05).

3.4. Characterization of participants’ behaviour

We wanted to verify the possible existence of clusters of participants
with similar behaviour within the PG and OG groups. We did this by
performing a two-step cluster analysis with participant groups (PG and
OG) as categorical variable and the values of the four sliders as con-
tinuous variables. Two clusters characterize PG participants and are
described mainly by values of sliders s3 and s2 (the two predictors with
highest importance, 1.0 and 0.84 respectively). The first cluster is
formed by eight participants and the other one by three. Three clusters
of the same size (3 participants each) characterize OG participants, and
are explained mainly by the values of sliders s1 and s3 (the two pre-
dictors with highest importance, 1.0 and 0.78 respectively). Results are
shown in Fig. 9.

The results seem to suggest that both PG and OG participants can be
grouped in two and three groups respectively. We are aware that the
sample size is not large enough for generalizing the results of the cluster
analysis, nevertheless the clusters that emerge show that the majority of
PG participants had the same strategy when sonifying own gestures,
while OG participants adopted three distinct tactics.

3.5. Strategy used by participants for solving the experimental task

In this section we summarize the main results from the online
survey answered by both PG and OG participants after completing the
experiment. The survey contained nine questions, but the most relevant
for the current study was the one in which we asked participants to
describe the strategy they had followed for solving the assigned task of
fitting a sound to performed or observed movements.

Among PG participants, several participants (8 out of 14) ex-
plained their strategy by using terms related to their own body move-
ments and how they were connected to sound. They focused more on
the settings of the sliders and how these affected the sound resulting
from their own movements. See Table 3 for a list of comments by eight
PG participants.

Among OG participants, six out of eleven participants explained
their strategy by using terms related to the movements made by the PG
participants and how they were connected to sound. Five participants
used terms related to emotions (e.g. feeling, pleasing, irritating). See
Table 4 for a list of comments by eight OG participants.

4. Discussion

In this section, we discuss the results presented in the previous
section. We first map the results to the two initial hypotheses and then
R. Bresin, et al.

1400

 

Wt JLB
MY),
Da

i,
ZS

 

OZ
TS.

International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 144 (2020) 102500

ay
KY

oO
QS

SD

0 200

Hand X location (mm)

1300 t/ Tie
VW ee
KAN RSS
E MONS
— 1200 HY At INS OG BOR
NYT lis Se
SN ) AN PELL

E Nyy
> 4100 \\ AAS LAAT fe
5 Sk ILA %
Ir SS Gr oe 7”

1000

900

-400 -200

1500 }

1400
E
= 1300
S
8
>
© 1200
oO
Tt

1100

1000

 

Hand X location (mm)

Fig. 7. PG participants 3 (above) and 8 (below), who took part in the experiment during the first day, performing the infinite and square movement. The two plots
show the segments we provided as input to the movement feature extraction algorithms. Each segment has a different color.

we draw a more general interpretation of the results. In order to fa-
cilitate the reading of the discussion we have numbered the significant
correlations presented in Section 3.3 from C1 to C7.

Hypothesis H1 - Effect of condition on sound parameters. From the
results presented above it appears that there was an effect of con-
dition on the manipulation of sound parameters by participants. It is
reasonable to assume, by looking at Tables 3 and 4, that when so-
nifying hand movements, participants performing a gesture paid
more attention to the information provided by own movements than
participants observing the movements. Contrary to PG participants,
OG participants made use of emotional terms for explaining their

sonification strategy. This also seems to be confirmed by the cluster
analysis presented in Fig. 9, in which PG participants seem to follow
two very similar strategies, while OG participants adopted three
different sonification strategies.

The analysis of the slider values presented in Section 3.3 also con-
firms that PG and OG participants used different strategies when
adjusting the four sliders for generating the desired sonification.
More in detail, PG participants focused more on sonifying the
quality of their movements (smoothness and directness, see C1, C2
and C4), while OG participants focused more on low-level physical
features of the movements, such as velocity and acceleration (see C5
and C6).
R. Bresin, et al.

Median Values in the Performance Room

1.000

0.500

Median

0.000 ee

-0.500

 

-1.000
Slider 1 Slider 2 Slider 3 Slider 4

Sliders
Error Bars: 95% Cl

International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 144 (2020) 102500
Median Values in the Observer Room

1.00074

0.50074
0.00075
-0.5005

-1.000°>-$-$?>?A [Yeo Oo. SF
Slider 1 Slider 2 Slider 3 Slider 4

Sliders
Error Bars: 95% Cl

Median

 

 

Fig. 8. Medians, 25 and 75 percentiles, and 95% confidence interval for each slider for PG participants (left panel) and OG participants (right panel).

Hypothesis H2 - Effect of movement on sound parameters. The analysis
of the slider values presented in Section 3.3 shows differences be-
tween the two groups of participants. PG participants focused more
on associating sound parameters (such as the sound level controlled
by s4) to qualities of their own movement (i.e., variation of
smoothness and directness). From the experiment, it emerges a
tendency of PG participants towards a preference for sonifying the
smoothness of own movements by using low frequency sounds, i.e.,
high values of smoothness were mapped to lower frequencies, below
600 Hz, and vice-versa (see C1). PG participants associated higher
acceleration of movements to larger variations of sound level, which
in turn were significantly correlated with larger variations of SI of
the infinite movement (see C3). So, the faster the acceleration of the
infinite movements, the louder their sonification. This is in line with
principles of ecological perception and cross-modal correspondences
(Spence, 2011).

OG participants associated higher acceleration of movements to
larger variations of sound level, which in turn were significantly
positively correlated with variations of standard deviation of the
directness of the square movement (see C7). However, the most
interesting difference between OG and PG participants’ use of the
sound parameters was that OG participants associated higher FO
with slower velocity and softer sound level (see C5 and C6), in
contrast with the principles of ecological perception and cross-
modal correspondences (Spence, 2011). This could be explained as a
strategy by OG participants for emphasizing slower movements
characterized by lower frequent sounds (low FO) with higher sound
level in order to make them more perceivable (see C5 and C6).

These results confirm that our initial Hypotheses 1 was met and that

Clusters of participants in the performer group (PG)

Slider 2

 

 

 

T T T T
-1.000 -.500 -000 -500 1.000

Slider 3

Table 3
Strategy used by eight PG participants for solving the experimental task.

Strategy

I used big moves to find out what the sliders did then I did more exact changes to get the
sound I wanted.

I tried to find the position of the slider that I thought were the most fitting for both
movements.

I compared my movements with the sound and tried to find the levels that was most likely
my movements.

I tried to be consistent in my movements. I first increased the values of the sliders, where-
after I reduced the values, and then I allowed myself to try the places I liked. I tried to
first do one slider at a time in the last step.

Trying to find the right volume and create a sound that reacted to my motions.

I tried to make the sound sounds harmonic, pacing my motion, and not too sharp to,
somehow, explain how I was moving.

I tried to make the sound sync with my movements without delays.

I tried to see patterns with moving the sliders and then moving the stick, that was kind of
difficult, but that was my strategy at least.

Hypothesis 2 was met by PG participants but not by OG participants.
The latter used sonification strategies that are in conflict with principles
of cross-modal correspondences and ecological perception, as docu-
mented in scientific literature (Dubus and Bresin, 2013; Spence, 2011).

Results also show a strong similarity with the findings reported in
the work by Repp (1995, 1997) on the control of legato notes in piano
performance. PG participants, like the pianists playing legato notes on a
grand piano, focused more on the quality of their movement (smooth-
ness and directness for PG participants, and optimal legato technique
for pianists), while OG participants, like the pianists remotely control-
ling legato notes, focused more on the sonic rendering (making it more
expressive and optimal for their ears and more connected to low-level

Clusters of participants in the observer group (OG)

Slider 3

 

 

T T T T
-1.000 -.500 .000 500 1.000
Slider 1

Fig. 9. Clusters of participants of the PG group (left panel) and the OG group (right panel) organized according to the values of two sliders.
R. Bresin, et al.

Table 4

International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 144 (2020) 102500

Strategy used by eight OG participants for solving the experimental task. The emotion column indicates strategies which involve emotional terms, while the motion

column refers to strategies in which motion terms have been used by participants.

Strategy Emotion Motion

Based my answers on feeling. x

I just tested and went for whatever felt somewhat OK. x

I wanted to hear a difference when the rod was moved in the patterns, but also so it sounded as pleasing as possible. x x

I enjoyed hearing how she moved but I didn’t like the sound so much. Nr 4 was the most irritating sound and nr 3 was the best way to hear her movements but stillnota x x
nice sound. I tried to find a balance where I got the “information” I wanted but not get it too uncomfortable for my ears.

Tried to adjust the sound so that the movement was palpable in the sound. x x

I listened for what setting made the most noise changes during movement in the first part. In the second part it was a bit easier to set the sliders in a way that seemed to fit x
with the actual movement.

I tried to find the timing of the movement and when the sensor stopped and turned direction, I looked for an clear pitch that differentiated from the constant noise. x

I tried different settings until the sound was affected by the motion of the other person, in some way. x

physical features, such as velocity, acceleration, or acoustic overlap as
in the case of the Repp study).

It should be also noted that participants in the two groups made
different choices, in average. In particular, sliders s2 and s3 were po-
sitioned in opposite locations of the scale (see Fig. 8). This confirms
different strategies between the two groups; PG participants preferred a
smoother timbre, characterized by a more stable fundamental fre-
quency, compared to the OG participants. Indeed, a different use of the
parameters associated with the sliders is confirmed by the different
significant correlations between slider values and motion quality
parameters as reported in the previous section (C1 to C7).

In summary, PG participants payed more attention to the smooth-
ness and directness of their own movements when sonifying them,
while OG participants focused more on velocity and acceleration of the
movements they were watching. Also, the majority of PG participants
used similar sonification strategies for their own gestures, while OG
participants adopted three distinct tactics, as emerged from the cluster
analysis on the use of the sliders.

The number of participants in our experiment is not large enough
for the generalization of results. Nevertheless, the outcomes of our
study suggest that designers of sonification of body movements should
consider to use different strategies when sonifying observed vs. per-
formed movements, in order to better support users’ role.

5. Conclusions

Movement sonification consists in the translation of the physical
properties of human movement (e.g., position, speed, acceleration of
limbs) into audio parameters (e.g., volume, timbre, etc.). In the work
presented in this paper, we investigated whether or not such a trans-
lation depends on the role of the individuals involved in the commu-
nication: they can be performers/listeners or observers/listeners. To do
that, we asked two groups of people (performers vs. observers) to de-
sign a movement sonification of two types of movements: smooth (the
infinite shape) vs. jerky (the square shape).

Results provide some preliminary support for our hypotheses: de-
pending on their role, performers and observers will choose different
sonification strategies. This is in line with previous findings described in
Repp (1995, 1997), Frid et al. (2016). Also, the type of movement
performed by the users (smooth/infinite vs. jerky/square) has an in-
fluence on the design of sonification depending on who was in control
of the sonification.

A possible explanation of these results is that the sonification of own
movements can be considered functional for supporting the movement
itself, while the sonification of another person’s movements focuses
mainly on the communication of certain movement qualities.

In conclusion, results from our experiment show that two usually
overlooked variables, that is, the role and context of users and the type
of movements they perform, should be carefully addressed in the
movement sonification design process. In this direction, further in-
vestigation with a larger number of participants could be carried out to

verify these preliminary results and test them also in other contexts and
with different sound models. Interesting scenarios could include, for
example, the sonification of movements in sport and rehabilitation, or
AR and VR applications, in which the representation of own body could
be either embodied or disembodied.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Roberto Bresin: Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing,
Data curation, Investigation, Conceptualization, Formal analysis,
Methodology, Visualization, Supervision. Maurizio Mancini: Writing -
original draft, Writing - review & editing, Data curation, Investigation,
Software, Formal analysis, Methodology, Visualization. Ludvig
Elblaus: Visualization, Investigation, Data curation, Software,
Conceptualization, Methodology. Emma Frid: Writing - original draft,
Data curation, Investigation, Conceptualization, Methodology.

Declaration of Competing Interest

We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest
associated with this publication and there has been no significant fi-
nancial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.
We confirm that the manuscript has been read and approved by all
named authors and that there are no other persons who satisfied the
criteria for authorship but are not listed. We further confirm that the
order of authors listed in the manuscript has been approved by all of us.
We confirm that we have given due consideration to the protection of
intellectual property associated with this work and that there are no
impediments to publication, including the timing of publication, with
respect to intellectual property. In so doing we confirm that we have
followed the regulations of our institutions concerning intellectual
property. We understand that the Corresponding Author is the sole
contact for the Editorial process (including Editorial Manager and di-
rect communications with the office). He/she is responsible for com-
municating with the other authors about progress, submissions of re-
visions and final approval of proofs. We confirm that we have provided
a current, correct email address which is accessible by the
Corresponding Author and which has been configured to accept email
from the Elsevier Editorial System.

Acknowledgements

This research was funded by European Union’s Horizon 2020
Research and Innovation Programme under Grant Agreement No.
645553 ICT DANCE (IA, 2015-2017). Dr Maurizio Mancini carried out
part of the movement analysis work described in the paper while being
affiliated to DIBRIS, University of Genoa (Italy). The authors would like
to thank the DANCE project coordinator Prof Antonio Camurri.
R. Bresin, et al.

References

Brunswick, E., 1956. Perception and the Representative Design of Psychological
Experiments. Berkeley: University

Camurri, A., Volpe, G., Piana, S., Mancini, M., Niewiadomski, R., Ferrari, N., Canepa, C.,
2016. The dancer in the eye: towards a multi-layered computational framework of
qualities in movement. Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium on
Movement and Computing. ACM, pp. 6.

Dahl, S., Bevilacqua, F., Bresin, R., Clayton, M., Leante, L., Poggi, I., Rasamimanana, N.,
2009. Gestures in performance. In: Godg@y, R.I., Leman, M. (Eds.), Musical Gestures:
Sound, Movement, and Meaning. Routledge, New York, pp. 36-68.

Dubus, G., Bresin, R., 2013. A systematic review of mapping strategies for the sonification
of physical quantities. PLoS ONE 8 (12), e82491.

Frid, E., Bresin, R., Alborno, P., Elblaus, L., 2016. Interactive sonification of spontaneous
movement of children: cross-modal mapping and the perception of body movement
qualities through sound. Front. Neurosci. 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2016.
00521.

Ghisio, S., Coletta, P., Piana, S., Alborno, P., Volpe, G., Camurri, A., Primavera, L., Ferrari,
C., Guenza, C.M., Moretti, P., et al., 2015. An open platform for full body interactive
sonification exergames. 2015 7th International Conference on Intelligent
Technologies for Interactive Entertainment (INTETAIN). IEEE, pp. 168-175.

Godgy, R.I., Haga, E., Jensenius, A.R., 2005. Playing “air instruments”: mimicry of sound-
producing gestures by novices and experts. In: Gibet, S., Courty, N., Kamp, J. (Eds.),

10

International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 144 (2020) 102500

Gesture in Human-Computer Interaction and Simulation. Springer, Heidelberg,
Germany, pp. 256-267.

Hogan, N., Sternad, D., 2007. On rhythmic and discrete movements: reflections, defini-
tions and implications for motor control. Exp. Brain Res. 181 (1), 13-30.

Hunt, A., Hermann, T., 2011. Interactive sonification. In: Hermann, T., Hunt, A., Neuhoff,
J.G. (Eds.), The Sonification Handbook. Logos Verlag, Berlin, Germany, pp. 273298.

Juslin, P.N., Timmers, R., 2010. Expression and communication of emotion in music
performance. Handbook of Music and Emotion: Theory, Research, Applications. pp.
453-489.

Mazzarino, B., Mancini, M., 2009. The need for impulsivity & smoothness - improving HCI
by qualitatively measuring new high-level human motion features. SIGMAP 2009 -
International Conference on Signal Processing and Multimedia Applications,
Proceedings. pp. 62-67.

Repp, B.H., 1995. Acoustics, perception, and production of legato articulation on a digital
piano. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 97 (6), 3862-3874.

Repp, B.H., 1997. Acoustics, perception, and production of legato articulation on a
computer-controlled grand piano. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 102 (3), 1878-1890.

Scherer, K.R., 1978. Personality inference from voice quality: the loud voice of ex-
troversion. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 8 (4), 467-487.

Spence, C., 2011. Crossmodal correspondences: a tutorial review. Atten. Percept.
Psychophys. 73 (4), 971-995. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13414-010-0073-7.

Volpe, G., Camurri, A., 2011. A system for embodied social active listening to sound and
music content. J. Comput. Cult. Herit. 4 (1), 2:1-2:23.
