International Journal of Industrial Engineering Computations 11 (2020) 153-172

Contents lists available at GrowingScience

International Journal of Industrial Engineering Computations

homepage: www.GrowingScience.com/ijiec

 

Relief operations as a multi-project: Colombian case

Maria Catalina Gonzalez Forero*? and Leonardo José Gonzalez Rodriguez”

“Grupo de investigacion en Alimentacion, Gestion de Procesos y Servicio, Escuela Internacional de Ciencias Economicas y
Administrativas, Universidad de La Sabana, Km 7 autopista norte de Bogota, D.C., Chia (Cundinamarca), Colombia

’Grupo de investigacion en Sistemas Logisticos, Facultad de Ingenieria, Universidad de La Sabana, Km 7 autopista norte de Bogota,
D.C., Chia (Cundinamarca), Colombia

CHRONICLE ABSTRACT
Article history: The purpose of this paper is to present the relief operations (RO), responding to a sudden, natural,
Received November 11 2018 national disaster (SNND) as a multi-mode resource-constrain multi-project scheduling problem
a Revised Format (MRCMPSP). A conceptual framework at a strategic level is constructed and the Colombian RO
ay . . .
Accepted May 24 2019 for an earthquake response is shown as an illustrative case. We concluded that RO can be

Available online addressed as a MRCMPSP and that for Colombian case, it is a convenient way to board it.
May 242019) Addressing RO asa MRCMPSP allows managers to implement different project scheduling tools
Keywords: successful in other contexts.

Humanitarian logistics
Disaster relief operations
Project management

Colombia © 2020 by the authors; licensee Growing Science, Canada

1. Introduction

Humanitarian logistics is an umbrella term for a mixed array of operations. It covers disaster relief
(immediate operations after the disaster occurs) as well as continuous support for developing affected
regions (Kovacs & Spens, 2007). Disaster Relief Operations (RO) require significant amounts of rescue
materials that must be assigned and distributed in a short period of time (Ferrer et al., 2015; Guanxiang
et al., 2010; Nappi & Souza, 2015; Oloruntoba & Gray, 2006). They are concerned with managing the
flow of those supplies and personnel from their point of origin to the appropriate places at the correct
time, with the purpose of alleviating the suffering of affected people (Holguin-Veras et al., 2012b).

It has been demonstrated that there is a direct relationship between the number of deaths after a SNND
and logistics management strategies used for disaster response (Moreno, 2012). For example, because of
absence of anti-seismic standards, and as a result of weak logistics management, it was estimated that
over 300,000 people died in the Haitian earthquake of 2010 (Haiti, Government, 2010), in contrast to
521 victims in the Chilean earthquake in 2010 (Elnashai, 2012). This significant difference in the number

* Corresponding author Tel. : +57-1-8615555
E-mail: leonardo.gonzalezl@unisabana.edu.co (L.J. Gonzalez Rodriguez)

 

2020 Growing Science Ltd.
doi: 10.5267/j.ijiec.2019.5.002
154

of deaths was observed despite the magnitude and duration of the Chile earthquake being higher by 1.5
(moment magnitude scale) and longer by 65 s, respectively, than the Haiti earthquake. Therefore, in order
to decrease the probability of human loss in an SNND, it is relevant to study logistics of RO. Furthermore,
its study relevance increases, since logistics efforts account for 80 percent of disaster relief (Van
Wassenhove, 2006; Ophiyandri et al., 2013).

Logistics for RO have been mainly addressed as a particular supply chain (Makepeace et al., 2017;
Dufour et al., 2017; Sahebjamnia et al., 2017; Goldschmidt & Kumar, 2016; D'Haene et al., 2015; Zheng
et al., 2015; Ransikarbum & Mason, 2014; Overstreet et al., 2011; Van Wassenhove & Pedraza Martinez,
2012; Holguin-Veras et al. 2012b; Altay & Green III, 2006; Van Wassenhove, 2006; Oloruntoba & Gray,
2006; Brucker et al., 1999). In this study, we used the project management approach.

The Project Management Institute (PMI) defines project management as the “application of knowledge,
Skills, tools and techniques to project activities in order to meet or exceed stakeholder needs and
expectations from a project” (PMI, 2004). Project Management has been studied in both Management
Science and Operations Research. Management Science trends to focus on quantitative tools and the soft
skills necessary to manage project successfully. Operations Research gives the essential scientific
contribution to the success of project management through the development of models and algorithms
(San Cristobal, 2016). In this paper, we focus on Operations Research approach of Project Management.

Project management has been widely used in many fields (architecture engineering, software
development, and production manufacture). In the literature reviewed we found that project management
for humanitarian logistics has been boarded mainly for recovery programs (not immediate response
projects) and through non-Operations Research models, but Management Science scope such as:
leadership and community participation (Mojtahedi and Oo, 2017; Lin et al., 2016; Sadiqi et al., 2016),
housing projects (Vahanvati & Mulligan, 2017; Dikmen & Elias-Ozkan, 2016) analysis of project’s
performance (Kim & Choi, 2013; Lin Moe et al., 2007), resource availability (Chang et al., 2012), and
others (Kalkman & de Waard, 2017; Gacasan & Wiggins, 2017).

According to the Operations Research approach of Project Management, the life cycle of a project
consists of six phases (Demeulemeester & Herroelen, 2002): (1) a conceptual design phase where the
needs that justify project execution are identified. A (2) project definition phase in which the objectives
of the project are defined along with the scope and strategy to achieve these objectives. (3) The planning
phase which involves identifying the activities to be carried out in order to achieve the project objective
such as activity durations, precedence relations between them, and resources needs and availability are
estimated. Subsequently, the project enters the (4) scheduling phase that includes the construction of a
schedule that identifies the start and end times of each of the activities, and the allocation of resources.
During the (5) execution phase of the project, 1ts progress must be monitored, applying corrective actions
if necessary (control). Finally, the project enters the (6) termination phase, which involves the delivery
of project outputs (products and/or services) and the writing of performance reports. Patanakul et al.
(2010) present an empirical study on the use of project management tools and techniques across project
life-cycle and according to nine knowledge area: integration management, scope management, cost
management, quality management, time management, risk management, human talent management,
communications management and procurement management. For example, the CPM (critical path
method), PERT (Program evaluation and review technique), GERT (Graphical Evaluation and Review
Technique), Gantt charts, simulation, Monte Carlo analysis, buffer management, schedule crashing,
milestone charts and variance analysis are the main techniques for project’s time management.

In this document, we focus on the (3) planning phase of a project, with the intention to prepare the (4)
scheduling phase. A Project Scheduling Problem (PSP) is visually represented in two ways. One of them
is the acyclic graph G= (N, A) which contains a set of NV nodes and a set of A arcs (See an example project
M. C. Gonzalez Forero and L. J. Gonzalez Rodriguez / International Journal of Industrial Engineering Computations 11 (2020) 155

in Figure 1). The nodes represent project activities, and the arcs represent the beginning and end of the
precedence relationships. In the project representation example of Figure 1, each activity is identified by
a number in the center of the node. Activities 1 and 9 are dummy activities because they don’t consume
any time or resources; they just indicate, respectively, the start and end of the project. Each arc (i, 7) € A,
indicates that activity i, (i= J,..., n) is an immediate predecessor of activity 7. It means that the activity 7
can’t begin while activity i hasn’t finish. The duration time (di) of the activity 1s shown below each node,
and the resource needed to be execute is shown above each node. In the example of Figure 1, only one
resource type is considered and its total availability 1s five (5) units. Projects visual representations helps
to identify its critical path(s). Projects have at least one critical path, which is the path from the starting
to the finish node with the highest duration time. Activities that belong to the critical path are considered
urgent activities to execute because if even one creates a delay it represents a delay of the whole project.

Total Resource Availability = 5

 

8

2 2

Fig. 1. Nine-activity project representation example. Source: Based on Demeulemeester and Herroelen, 200

Project scheduling deals with decision-making on determining the time required to implement the
activities of a project to achieve a certain objective and the allocation of resources for each activity (San
Cristobal, 2016). Among different factors, correct scheduling is one of the vital elements for project
management success; incorrect scheduling can considerably increase the project costs (Habibi et al.,
2018). There are several ways to schedule projects including the Critical Path Method (CPM) and
Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT). Various methods such as resource leveling and
allocation, network analysis methods, Gantt chart, mathematical methods and simulation have been use
for solving project scheduling problems.

There is a lack of research in specialized literature that have presented a project scheduling for managing
RO. In the literature reviewed, only two documents board RO as a scheduling project, but none of them
sets a conceptual framework of the project definition and characteristics. Yan et al., (2009) proposed a
heuristic model for solving the scheduling problem of a specific maritime disaster rescue project. Moreno
(2012) presented the Colombian RO for a natural, sudden, and national disaster, aiming to find strategic
policies that minimizes the number of death.
156

Because of the importance of studying RO and the lack of research addressing the problem by employing
a project scheduling approach, the objective of this paper is to present RO for SNND as a MRCMPSP.
The Colombian RO are presented as an illustrative case.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the conceptual frame of projects characteristics.
Section 3 shows how RO can be managed as a project of the MRCMPSP type. Section 4 presents the
Colombian RO case for an earthquake as a MRCMPSP, and analyzes its characteristics. Conclusions are
presented in Section 5.

2. Projects characteristics

A project is defined as a “unique process, consisting of a set of coordinated and controlled activities
with start and finish dates, undertaken to achieve an objective conforming to specific requirements,
including the constraints of time, cost and resources” (ISO, 1990).

To solve project scheduling problems, project managers need to understand the characteristics of the
project. Understanding projects characteristics is of significance importance for project managers
because of differences associated with decisions making and goal attainment. Its characteristics affects
the modelling, evaluation, and control of projects and the objectives of time, cost, quality and safety (San
Cristobal, 2017). For example, with projects that have been characterized as complex (network
complexity), 1t has been demonstrated that network methods are efficient tools for solving scheduling
problems (Habibi et al., 2018; Martinelli et al., 2016). In addition to the objective function, Browning
and Yassine (2010a) define three characteristics of a project: network complexity (C), resource
distribution (ARLF), and resource contention (MAUF).

2.1. Network Complexity (C)

Measuring network complexity has become an integral part of project management (He et al., 2015; Lu
et al., 2015), and generally measures the number of precedence relationships between activities. A greater
number of precedence relationships among the activities leaves less flexibility for doing them at a
different time (higher complexity).

In its most basic form, the measure of network complexity accounts for the number of activities or nodes,
and precedence relationships or arcs. Browning and Yassine (2010b) suggested a [0,1] normalized
network complexity measure, for a project with six or more activities, and have at least N-1 non-
redundant arcs, as follows:

4A'’—4N+4
© = Cy 2 (1)
where A’ 1s the number of non-redundant arcs, and N is the number of activities or nodes of the project.
Based on the experiment conducted by Browning and Yassine (2010a), low complexity 1s defined for
C<0.14, medium complexity is defined for 0.14<C<0.69, and high network complexity 1s defined for
C>0.69. In the case of multiple projects, network complexity for L projects is defined as a vector C =
{Cl, C2, C3,... CL}.

2.2. Resource distribution (ARLF)
M. C. Gonzalez Forero and L. J. Gonzalez Rodriguez / International Journal of Industrial Engineering Computations 11 (2020) 157

This factor identifies whether the bulk of the total resources required by a project is in the front or back
half of its (resource unconstrained) critical path (CP) duration (see Figure 2). ARLF is calculated using

Eq. (2),

1 CP; Kit Ni
Nilk
asd. Y°Y 2
l CP, La Lu « 4 Ut“ tt Kin (2)
= =11=

where

CP, is the critical path duration of project /,

N, is the number of activities of project /,

K;, 1s the number of resource types required by activity i of project /,
Tix 1S the amount of k resource type required by activity 7 of project J,

1, t< —
Zit = CP ’
1, t> =

{ if activity i of project l is active at time t
Xit =

0, otherwise

ZirXir€ {-1,0.1}.

9

P| Project Resource Distribution
ARLF Start Mid-Point End Start Mid-Point End
I

Positive

Near-zero

 

Fig. 2. Possible resource distribution. Source: Browning and Yassine, 2010a

Projects with ARLF ~ 0 can have dramatically different shapes. To address these issues, we adopt the
normalized ARLF (NARLF) measure proposed by Browning and Yassine (2010a) which normalizes the
resource distribution over the problem's CP duration:

Kit NI

L P
1 Tilk
NARLF = > > > » 2, X; (=) 3
LCPyax La ut tlt kin (3)

t=1

 

where
CPyax = Max (CP1,..., CPL)

2.3. Resource contention (MAUF)
158

Resource contention measure is used when resource distribution (ARLF) measure is not sufficient to
describe the location of the bulk of the resources required. This case is represented by the last row in
Figure 5 (ARLF ~ 0), in which the distribution of resources can have different behaviors under one ARLF’
value. For this case, Browning and Yassine (2010a) proposed a modified factor of average resource
utilization (VAUF).

3. Relief Operations as a MRCMPSP

In this section, we build a conceptual framework showing, first, how RO is considered as a project. Then,
we present the resource constrain scheduling model appropriated to be used for RO projects. Finally, the
convenience to board the multimode and the multi-project models for RO projects is discussed.

3.1. Relief Operations as a Project

Conceptually, Demeulemeester and Herroelen (2002) (quoting Slack et al, 1998) claim that the diversity
of projects (from the construction of a tunnel channel to planning a wedding) seems to have six common
elements: an objective or goal, uniqueness, complexity, temporary nature, uncertainty, and life cycle. RO
meet each of these features to be considered as a project, as described below.

An objective or goal: projects must have a definable product, result, or output that is typically defined in
terms of cost, quality, and time required to complete project activities. Relief Operations projects have a
definable product, result or output, which is the delivery of supplies and services to people affected by a
disaster (Wassenhove, 2006). These deliveries might be done within constraint resources (minimum
cost), attending affected people (quality), and the fastest deliveries (time) (Holguin-Veras et al., 2012b).

Uniqueness: a project is unique and not a repetitive business. Repeated similar projects have distinct
differences in terms of the usage and availability of resources, and the actual environment where these
projects are executed. The uniqueness of disaster logistics projects exists because of the uniqueness of
each disaster. Two disasters are not exactly the same (Holguin-Veras et al., 2012b).

Complexity: practitioners frequently describe projects as simple or complex. This indicates a practical
acceptance that complexity makes a difference to the management of projects. Definition of project’s
complexity consists of many varied interrelated parts (activities and resources), and a complicated,
involved dimension (Baccarini, 1996). Several authors consider complexity as one of the four
characteristics that make RO a more difficult problem to handle with regard to general business logistics.
This expresses the need for delivering a significant and wide variety of supplies 1n a short period of time
(Van Wassenhove, 2006; Pettit & Beresford, 2009; Balcik et al., 2010). In addition, as many
humanitarian organizations are involved in RO, coordination and collaboration is difficult to achieve.
Goldschmidt and Kumar (2016) affirms that humanitarian organizations have historically operated
independently with the lack of cooperation and coordination often resulting in the failure of many of the
RO.

Temporary nature: projects and their related activities have a defined beginning and end time. RO
projects start their activities (start time) at the moment the disaster occurs and the operation ends when
the affected people are restituted. The duration of the project depends on the region, the magnitude and
type of disaster. In Colombia, the start and end time of RO activities are defined in actuation protocols.
For example, according to SNPAD (2006a), the response activities of a SNND, may last a week, starting
from the moment the disaster occurs.
M. C. Gonzalez Forero and L. J. Gonzalez Rodriguez / International Journal of Industrial Engineering Computations 11 (2020) 159

Uncertainty: projects are planned prior to execution; thus, they carry an important risk element. The
uncertainty is evidenced in three of the four characteristics reported in the literature that makes RO a
more difficult problem to handle with regard to general business logistics. First, authors such as Sheu
(2007) and Vitoriano et al. (2010) considered that unexpected damages may be caused to infrastructure
affected by a disaster, thus complicating the distribution of resources and rescue operations. Second, the
information on the amount of resources required is quite limited as the demand of resources is
unpredictable and changes with time. Third, the requirement of logistic resources during an emergency
situation cannot be controlled directly by decision makers (Van Wassenhove, 2006; Pettit & Beresford,
2009; Balcik et al., 2010).

Life cycle: the life cycle of a project consists of six phases: (1) a conceptual design phase where needs
that justify project execution are identified. A (2) project definition phase in which the objectives of the
project are defined along with the scope and strategy to achieve these objectives. The (3) planning phase,
(4) scheduling phase, (5) implementation phase, and (6) termination phase are open to be defined by
project managers. Regarding disaster management, the first four phases of a project: design, definition,
planning and scheduling are activities developed during the mitigation or preparation phases of a disaster
(see Table 1). Remain two phases of a project: implementation and termination are the RO itself, executed
after the disaster occurs.

As shown above, RO are the activities to be planned, schedule and implemented as part of an
humanitarian project for disasters attention. In this paper, we present the case of the planning phase of a
project, with the intention to prepare the scheduling phase for the immediate response of a SNND project
in Colombia.

Table 1
Disaster management stages according to different authors
Authors Disaster Stages
Van Wassenhove, (2006) - Preparation Post-disaster
oO
Pettit and Beresford (2006) - Preparation S Response Reconstruction
Altay and Green III (2006) Mitigation Preparation 5 Response Reconstruction
oO
Oo .
I diat ;
Kovacs and Spens (2007), (2009) - Preparation o smeanens Reconstruction
2 response
Van Wasenhove (2006); Tomasini and V es ; A eee:
an Wasenhove ( ); Tomasini and Van Mitigation Preparation A Response Rehabilitation

Wasenhove (2009)
Source: Based on Moreno, 2012

3.2. Relief Operations as a resource-constrained project

The resource-constrained project scheduling problem (RCPSP) has been widely discussed in the
literature, in both operations research and artificial intelligence, in order to develop algorithms and
mathematical models that generate the best project schedules (Zhang et al., 2012; Lombardi & Milano,
2012; Haouari et al., 2012).

It is well known for humanitarian authors that the RO of an SNND implies lack of resources specifically:
supply, people, technology, transportation capacity, and money (Kovacs & Spens, 2009; Overstreet et
al., 2011; Goldschmidt & Kumar 2016; among others). Emergency or humanitarian supplies are of a very
wide range (be they from formal or informal sources), which includes products and materials for use and
consumption by the population, such as medicines, food products, household goods, clothing, etc., to
those required by organizations to provide assistance, such as rescue equipment, building materials, tools,
160

etc. (PAHO, 2000). The lack of resources to deal with convergence coupled with its usually large
proportion of unsuitable aid (e.g., non- and low-priority donations) creates an important logistical
challenge (Holguin-Veras et al., 2012b). Resource constrains in humanitarian context are also
particularly useful to express the potential reduction of transport capacities after a disaster (Florez et al.,
2015). In this study, we focus on the classical RCPSP that uses a finite number of renewable resources.
The duration of each activity is assumed to be represented by a single, deterministic time, and activities
cannot be interrupted once they have started (no preemption). Moreover, it presents precedence
constraints strictly end-start type. From the classical RCPSP, multiple modes for projects
implementation, and multiple projects that together fulfill a larger project, are two specific cases of
RCPSP found in the literature. They are both described below and analyzed for a national RO situation.

3.3. Relief Operations as a multi-mode project

The multi-mode scheduling problem is an extension of the RCPSP model. Multi-mode projects are those
in which the same activity can be executed using different types and amounts of resources, and therefore,
they can be executed at different times. Projects with multiple modes are more realistic than those with
a single mode, because in practice, resource variability is common during project implementation (Ju &
Chen, 2012). The difference between RCPSP and multi-mode resource-constraints project scheduling
problem (MRCPSP) is that RCPSP has only one pair of activity duration-resource requirements to
perform an activity, whereas in MRCPSP each activity can be, perform by selecting one out of several
different combinations of activity duration-resource requirements. The various alternate combinations
are call modes. Regarding RO projects, different modes exists because of the technical and technological
evolution that may vary the types of resources and equipment to execute operations, and that are evident
in changes of standards and protocols. The resources variety and the technical and technological
differences exists not only among time, but also among the organizations involved in response
operations; local, international, governmental, non-governmental, ONG’s, third party logistics, and a big
range of donors (Kovacs and Spens, 2007). For example, in Colombia, at least 20 organizations are
involved in national disaster response operations.

The variety and number of actors generate multiple projects that run simultaneously, as organizations
present differences in nature, culture, size, area of specialization and mode of operation (Chandes &
Paché, 2010). These actors are geographically dispersed, have little or no communication between them,
and an inadequate division of labor (Oloruntoba & Gray, 2006) this makes their aid activities generate
independent projects, which are executed on a common infrastructure, many times congesting it, a
phenomenon known as convergence of materials, information and personnel (Holguin-Veras and Jaller,
2012).

3.4. Relief Operations as a multi-project

Multi-projects are those that together fulfill a larger project, its activities are independent from each other,
but some resources are commonly used/shared among the subprojects (Geiger, 2017). The RO for
national disasters can be considered a multi-project problem, with all activities being classified in groups
based on a specific goal, in which each group or subproject fulfills a larger humanitarian attention project.
When multiple projects are simultaneously executed, and their activities require common resources, a

multi project board helps to coordinate activities, its resource allocation and the coordination of the
different areas of the organizations involved. Different project management tools, like the ones proposed
by the Project Management Institute (PMI) in its Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge
(PMBOOK, 2004) can be used to allow visualization and quantification of scarce resources, distribute
them avoiding conflicts between them and decreasing the duration of the different projects.
M. C. Gonzalez Forero and L. J. Gonzalez Rodriguez / International Journal of Industrial Engineering Computations 11 (2020) 161

According to Holguin-Veras et al. (2012a) the humanitarian logistics must deliver supplies to meet the
needs of the response process which includes: food and water for the responders; equipment and supplies
for medical teams, search and rescue, security forces; transportation, and construction equipment and
fuel. The definition and coordination of those subprojects depends of the regional Government. For
example, in the United States, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) considers 15
subprojects related as emergency support functions, for responding disasters, and include: transportation;
communications; public works and engineering; firefighting; emergency management; mass care,
emergency assistance, housing, and human services; logistics management and resource support; public
health and medical services; search and rescue; oil and hazardous materials response; agriculture and
natural resources; energy; public safety and security; long-term community recovery; external affairs
(FEMA, 2008). Two approaches have been used to board multiple projects, (see Fig. 3): (a) a multi-
project (MP) approach, conserving a separate critical path per project, and (b) a single-project approach,
using dummy activities and precedence arcs to combine the projects into a single mega-project and a
single critical path.

of N ’
oct SS 1 \
. ae / \
Project 1 ---4 ce / .
s “7 a4 \
sy 7 yf ‘
Start ~s, End if LY
| \
f /
‘ 4 i
i
7 1/ /
7 v
1, 7

SS ir
Start ~s, End Start ‘>
W
as

vs
wy
7 Woy
von
/ ‘ yt
. va yu
\3 \ af
1 N ro
\ N ao?
\ Voy sot
“7 N Vey vou
o . Voy ’
“7 SB \ \ ’
. ‘ \ ‘
S
Project / @---- @ \ (
-
s uc \ ’
.
Start ~ y" End \
ar sy \

(a) Multiproject approach

/ ,\
yd vA
yf VA
uf VA
uN, Vv

Ny NA
“7 I. Ny “c7 NN
aa x uv --7 a \
. . aa --7 7A
Project / ---4 ~ “os
j A) tiéC«O@Y -------- ,
- -
oe oa oc
7 i
. "
ts, «“ End
4
4
47
/
J!
7 f
vt

(b) Single-Project approach

Fig. 3. The two multi-project representation’s approaches. Source: Ju and Chen, 2012

When dealing with national disaster attention, the multi-project is the most appropriate approach for the
following reasons. As noted by Browning and Yassine (2010a), the single-project approach 1s less
realistic, as it implicitly assumes equal delay penalties for all projects. Moreover, aggregating multiple
projects yields very large problems and independent project analysis becomes difficult. Finally, because
subprojects in response operations are commonly led by different organizations (FEMA, 2008), so each
subproject has its own manager who is mainly interested in the individual project's descriptive
characteristics. As manager organizations and support organizations may take part of different
subprojects, resources among subprojects -such as staff, infrastructure, transport and communication
equipment, etc.- are sheared (FEMA, 2008). Multi-project scheduling model, as a model that coordinates
different subprojects activities, answers to one of the strongest challenges of humanitarian logistics: the
coordination of logistical activities among organizations involved in response operations (Wilson et al.,
2018; Kovacs & Spens, 2009; Holguin-Veras et al., 2012b). As noted before, so many humanitarian
organizations are involved in response operations, so coordination and collaboration is difficult to
achieve. Goldschmidt and Kumar (2016) affirms that humanitarian organizations have historically
operated independently with the lack of cooperation and coordination often resulting in the failure of
many of the RO. Multi-project scheduling model may give a global coordination support to the
independent activities of different organizations involved in a national disaster response.
162

4. The case of Colombian RO as a multi-project
4.1. Origin of the Colombian RO system

Since the flood caused by the activation of the Ruiz volcano in November 13, 1985, the Colombian
government identified the need to create a system to prevent and coordinate disaster response and
attention. Thus, it created the National System for Disaster Attention and Prevention (SNPAD, in its
Spanish acronym). Then, in 2011 it identified the need to adopt a comprehensive approach toward
disaster management (not only prevention and attention), and created the National Unit for Disaster Risk
Management (UNGRD, in its Spanish acronym) (Colombian Republic, 2011; UNGRD, 2012).

4.2. Structure of the Colombian RO system

As a multi-project, Colombian system is organized into ten (10) subsystems (SNPAD, 2006a), based on
the primary goal in emergency situations (see Fig. 4). Aid activities of each subsystem represent a single
project. The ten subsystems or subprojects are classified as follows: (1) search and rescue, (2) health and
sanitation, (3) feeding and lodging, (4) public services, (5) aid management, (6) telecommunications, (7)
public order or security, (8) accessibility and transport, (9) habitat and housing, and (10) production. This
structure and way of operating continues in force in 2018.

    
  
 

 
  
  

HABITAT
AND
HOUSING

 
  
 
 
 
 

PUBLIC
SERVICES

 

PRODUCTIVE
OR
LIVELIHOOD

   
     
  
    
  

TELECOMMUNICATION

   
   

PUBLIC
ORDER OR
SECURITY

Afected
population

    
  
   
  
  

   
  

TRANSPORT
AND
ACCESSABILITY

   
 

AID
MANAGEMENT

  
    
 
  
  

LODGING
AND
FEEDING

 
   
  
   

    
  

 

SEARCH
AND
RESCUE

HEALTH AND
SANITATION

Fig. 4. Colombian post-disaster humanitarian system. Source: Based on Moreno, 2012

Each subsystem of Colombian System has a governing entity and a set of supporting organizations (see
Table 2). As some organizations participate in more than one subproject, it reveals that among those
subprojects, resources are sheared. Each subsystem has its own objective, and they all together fulfil the
global RO objective. The UNGRD, 1s the Colombian organization in charge of the global multi-project
coordination.
M. C. Gonzalez Forero and L. J. Gonzalez Rodriguez / International Journal of Industrial Engineering Computations 11 (2020) 163

Table 2
Ten subprojects of Colombian RO

 

Subproject Coordinating entity Support entities

Civil Aeronautics of Colombia, INVIAS, DIMAR, INCO,
DGR, Road Police, Air Force, Navy.

Ministry of Education, Colombian Red Cross, Colombian
Lodging and feeding Ministry of Social Protection Civil Defense, National Police, Military Forces, SENA,
Ministry of Social Protection, DGR, Ministry of Agriculture.

 

Transport and accessibility Ministry of Transport

Colombian Red Cross, Military Forces, National Fire System,
Search and rescue Colombian Civil Defense Ministry of Transport, Civil Aeronautics of Colombia,
Ministry of Social Protection, National Police, DGR.

Ministry of Environment,

Habitat and housin Housing and Territorial Compensation Offices, National Housing Fund, Agrarian
e Planning - Housing Bank, CREPAD, CLOPAD, Ministry of Agriculture.
Directorate

Ministry of Foreign Affairs, DGR, Colombian Civil Defense,
Aid management Colombian Red Cross DIAN, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Social Protection,
National Police, National Disaster Fund, Attorney-general.

Ministry of the Interior and
Justice - Territorial Direction
and Public Order and Citizen
Coexistence

Ministry of Defense-General Command of the Military
Forces, National Police, Ministry of the Interior and Justice,
General Public Prosecutor's Office, Penitentiary Guard, DGR

Public order or security

Ministry of Commerce, ACOPI, INCODER, ICA, Agrarian
Bank, FINAGRO, CORPOICA, SAC, FEDEGAN, FENAVI,
Supply Corporations, ANDI, Colombian Security Council,
Chamber of Commerce

Colombian Red Cross, Colombian Civil Defense, IPS,
Health and sanation Ministry of Social Protection General Public Prosecutor's Office, National Police, Military
Forces, ICBF, DGR.

Ministry of Environment, Superintendent of Public Services,
Drinking Water Regulatory Commission, CREG, National
Police, Private businesses.

Productive or livelihood Ministry of Agriculture

Ministry of Mines and

Public services
Energy

Operators, DGR, Ministry of Social Protection, Ministry of
Telecommunications Ministry of Communications Defence, Military Forces, National Police, Colombian Red

Cross, Civil Defense.
INVIAS: National Institute of Roads. DIMAR: Maritime General Directorate. INCO: National Institute of Concessions. DGR: General Directorate of
Revenue. SENA: National Learning Service. CREPAD: Regional Committee for Disaster Prevention and Response. CLOPAD: Local Committee for Disaster
Prevention and Response. DIAN: National Tax and Customs Office. ACOPI: Colombian Association of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. INCODER:
Colombian institute of rural development. ICA: Colombian Agricultural Institute. FINAGRO: Fund for the financing of the agricultural sector. CORPOICA:
Colombian Corporation of Agricultural Research. SAC: Colombian Farmers' Association. FEDEGAN: Colombian Federation of ranchers. FENAVI: National
Poultry Federation. ANDI: National Association of Employers of Colombia. IPS: Health Services Institutions. ICBF: Colombian Institute of Family Welfare.
CREG: Energy and Gas Regulatory Commission.

Source: Based on SNPAD, 20061
4.3. Data gathering

To identify Colombian subprojects activities, precedence constraints and resource requirements, data was
collected from official documents concerning to action protocols for an SNND (SNPAD, 2006a, 2006b,
2006c, 2006d, 2006e, 2006f, 2006g, 2006h, 20061), web site of coordinating entities, and by face-to-face
semi structured interviews to experts. The interviews were conducted from January 2013 to June 2013.
Based on Harrell and Bradley (2009), we first conducted a judgment sampling, selecting directive
members from 100% of the coordinated entities and from the organization in charge of the global multi-
project coordination, UNGRD. Then, we asked the selected sample to refer us to persons with the
necessary knowledge of each specific subproject coordination. This final snowball sampling resulted in
164

15 participants interviewed (4 members of coordinated entities, 3 members of support entities and 8
members of UNGRD), who cover 100% of the subprojects knowledge coordination.

We asked the interviewed to answer all questions based on their experiences (strategic level) the RO of
a national earthquake of identical dimensions of the one occurred in Armenia, in 1999. We also asked
them to answer according to the current technical and technological level, so that the current Colombian
mode -and not 1999 technical and technological mode- (activities, resources required for each activity
and duration of each activity) for the RO was defined. The interview presented three sections
questionnaire (Appendix A) based on experience questions (Harrell and Bradley, 2009). The first section
aimed to identify the objective of each subproject and the activities required to execute it, as well as the
precedence constraints of activities. This first section resulted in the construction of a Work Breakdown
Structure (WBS) and a basic precedence diagram for each subproject.

Delivering the necessary aid
to the affected area

=}

Organize and coordinate the
aid delivery and
administration

Organize and coordinate the
aid reception

[-——— —]

 

Request and/or confirm aid Define and monitor the plan Define the delivery and
requirements for aid receiving administration system:
(5.1) (5.2) direct or indirect
Receive the offer of national Define the aid, the aid donors, Execute the delivery of
and international aid and aid quantities to be aid
(5.3) delivered (5.4) (5.5)

Fig. 5. WBS of Colombian Aid Management subproject

The second section aimed to identify the renewable resources needed for each task in each subproject, so
it resulted in a resource matrix. Finally, the third section aimed to identify the estimation of duration of
activities and the amount of each of the resources required for responding to a national earthquake. It
resulted in a database, which integrates the WBS tasks with the time and resources needs of each activity.
As a sample, in Fig. 5, Fig. 6 and Table 3 are shown respectively, the WBS, the precedence diagram, and
the matrix of resources required for the Colombian Aid Management subproject, resulted from the
interview toa UNGRD member.

Fig. 6. Precedence diagram of Colombian Aid Management subproject
Table 3

M. C. Gonzalez Forero and L. J. Gonzalez Rodriguez / International Journal of Industrial Engineering Computations 11 (2020)

Resources matrix of Colombian Aid Management subproject

165

 

NODE (Work package)

CODE

5.1

5.2

5.3

5.4

5.5

ACTIVITY

Request and/or
confirm aid
requirements

Define and
monitor the plan
for aid receiving

Receive the
offer of national
and international
aid

Define the aid,
the aid donors,
and aid
quantities to be
delivered

Execute the aid
delivery

RESPONSABLE

General and operational
vice principal (Colombian
Civil Defense)

Director of National relief
(Red Cross)

Director of International
Cooperation (Ministry of
Foreign Affairs)

Director of National relief
(Colombian Red Cross)

Director of International
Cooperation (Ministry of
Foreign Affairs)

Director of National relief
(Colombian Red Cross)

Director of International
Cooperation (Ministry of
Foreign Affairs)

Director of National relief
(Colombian Red Cross)

Director of International
Cooperation (Ministry of
Foreign Affairs)

RESOURCE

General and operational vice principal
(Colombian Civil Defense)

UNGRD* Professional
Computers

Radiotelephones

Director of national relief (Colombian
Red Cross)

Director of International Cooperation
(Ministry of Foreign Affairs)

Municipal Public Professional

Department Public Professional

Computers

Director of national relief (Colombian
Red Cross)

Director of International Cooperation
(Ministry of Foreign Affairs)

UNGRD* Professional
Computers

Radiotelephones

Director of national relief (Colombian
Red Cross)

Director of International Cooperation
(Ministry of Foreign Affairs)

UNGRD* Professional
Computers

Radiotelephones

Director of national relief (Colombian
Red Cross)

Director of International Cooperation
(Ministry of Foreign Affairs)

UNGRD Professional
Public Professional

Drivers
Trucks

Radiotelephones
Computers

Volunteers

*UNGRD: National Unit for Disaster Risk Management (in its Spanish acronym)

4.4. Colombian RO objective

QUANTITY

RELATIVE
UNIT

Disaster

Disaster
Disaster

Disaster

Disaster

Disaster

Affected
Municipality
Affected
Department

Disaster

Disaster

Disaster

Disaster
Disaster

Disaster

Disaster

Disaster

Disaster
Disaster

Disaster

Disaster

Disaster

Disaster
Disaster

Truck

38 tonnes of
aid to be
delivered

Disaster
Disaster

Truck

To study Colombian RO we considered a project with the objective of minimizing the makespan of a
sudden, natural and national earthquake 1.e., the minimization of deaths (Moreno, 2012). The time period
considered 1s the response phase (one week since the disaster occurs, according to SNPAD, 2006a). The
earthquake is the second type of sudden natural disasters in the world and has the highest occurrence
possibility in Colombia (Moreno, 2012).
166

4.5. Characteristics of Colombian RO multi-project

In order to understand the behavior of Colombian RO multi-project, we calculate its characteristics. Table
4 summarizes the characteristics of the project for the Colombian RO. Resource contention (WAUF) was
not calculated, as resource distribution value (ARLF) was sufficient to describe resource behavior (ARLF
not near @). As shown in Table 4, projects with less than six activities have a low network complexity.
Considering that an exclusive resource for one activity may not cause resource constrained conflicts,
only shared resources among activities (or projects) were considered for calculating the ARZF indicator.

Table 4
Colombian RO characteristics
Critical
N° Subproject “oO reduntant complexity Cualitication dentin distribution tcation
ares (a') (c)* (hours) ARLED** 4
1 Transport and accessibility 13 13 -0.033 Low 39 -1690.176 Negative
2 Lodging and feeding 11 9 NA Low 22 -2149.163 Negative
3 Search and rescue 17 17 -0.018 Low 15 257.731 Possitive
4 Habitat and housing 3 1 NA Low 9 -29898 .498 Negative
5 Aid management 5 4 NA Low 23 11.760 Possitive
6 Public order or security 8 7 -0.222 Low 7 -2188.689 Negative
7 Productive or livelihood 7 5 NA Low 43.5 -9.752 Negative
8 Health and sanation 32 33 0.000 Low 117.25 -4677.915 Negative
9 Public services 17 21 0.053 Low 42.8 -79.074 Negative
10  Telecommunications 16 15 -0.041 Low 120 -5.622 Negative

* Dummy activities are not considered to calculate C;
** Based on scheduling each activity at its early start time (EST schedule)

As shown in Table 5, all of the Colombian RO projects have a low network complexity (C<0.14). The
multi-project vector is surprising, given the complexity feature of RO described in section 2.1. Therefore,
although RO are naturally complex, they can certainly be manageable by employing a multi-project
management approach. Resource distribution for the multi-project Colombian case was calculated using

Eq. (3).

NARLF = —33,69

The Colombian NARLF result represents a back-loaded resources distribution. It 1s surprising because,
as mentioned before, some authors affirmed that emergency situations require significant amounts of
rescue materials that must be assigned and distributed in a short period of time, especially immediately
after a disaster occurs. Hence, a front-loaded resource distribution was expected. This behavior may be
a consequence of the fact that the project is design at a strategic level, so that at this level, resources
needed are not of significant amounts. We may also consider that when a disaster occurs, diagnosis
activities are executed to identify disaster damages. Then, according to the diagnosis stage, response
activities are executed. Diagnosis activities require less resources than response activities, but the time
duration required for completion of diagnosis activities may not always be lower than response activities.
Thus, two observations can be provided for observing a back-loaded resource distribution: first, because
of the current disaster response mode, the Colombian system has a prolonged diagnosis stage. Second,
resources required in diagnosis activities 1s significantly different from resources required in response
activities. Based on both this two observations, it is suggested to find ways to reduce the duration of the
diagnosis stage.
M. C. Gonzalez Forero and L. J. Gonzalez Rodriguez / International Journal of Industrial Engineering Computations 11 (2020) 167

5. Conclusions

From a conceptual point of view, this paper present the relief operations (RO), responding to a SNND,
by employing a project approach. Relief Operations can be addressed as a multi-mode resource-
constrained multi-project scheduling problem (MPRCPSP). This approach answers to one of the
strongest challenges of humanitarian logistics: the coordination of logistical activities among
organizations involved in response operations. Furthermore, it enable the use of project management
tools (successful in other contexts) in order to find better response times and reduce mortality caused by
natural disasters. The methodology used for the Colombian case can be extended to RO from other
countries, other natural disasters (such as flood, mass movements, and windstorms), and other levels of
decision making (tactical and operative). The methodology outputs can be used as a base for developing
software and disaster response protocols that facilitate decision making for allocating and distribution of
resources at a strategic level.

For the Colombian project case, RO presents a low network complexity and a back-loaded resources
distribution. The low network complexity reveals the convenience to board Colombian RO as a
MRCMPSP because it can certainly be a manageable project. It also suggests replicating, for future
research, the methodology in other countries to evaluate if the convenience of boarding RO as a
MRCMPSP may or may not be generalized. Because of the significant amounts of resources required
immediately after a disaster occurs, a front-loaded resource distribution was expected. Instead, a back-
loaded resource distribution was observed, which suggests that the Colombian disaster phase of
diagnosis, spend more time than desirable to meet the victim’s needs. It is suggested that more efforts
(project modes) should be taken to reduce time of the planning activities (preparation phase) of a national
disaster in Colombia.

Acknowledgment

Authors truly express gratitude to undergraduate students of Engineering Faculty of Universidad de La
Sabana, who supported the interview process. We also thank to the interviewee members of public and
private Colombian entities, for their time and commitment. Finally we would like to thank Universidad
de La Sabana and its sponsorship of research: Methodology for the allocation and localization of
resources in humanitarian logistics systems in collaborative contexts, under uncertainty, through project
dynamics and focused logistics.

References

Altay, N., & Green, W. G., (2006). OR/MS research in disaster operations management. European
Journal of Operational Research, 175(1), 475-493.

Baccarini, D. (1996). The concept of project complexity—a review. International Journal of Project
Management, 14(4), 201-204.

Balcik, B., Beamon, B. M., Krejci, C. C., Muramatsu, K. M., & Ramirez, M., (2010). Coordination in
humanitarian relief chains: Practices, challenges and opportunities. International Journal of
Production Economics, 126(1), 22-34.

Browning, T. R., & Yassine, A. A. (2010a). Resource-constrained multi-project scheduling: Priority rule
performance revisited. /nternational Journal of Production Economics, 126(2), 212-228.

Browning, T. R., & Yassine, A. A., (2010b). A random generator of resource-constrained multi-project
network problems. Journal of Scheduling, 13(2), 143-161.
168

Brucker, P., Drexl, A., Mohring, R., Neumann, K., and Pesch, E. (1999). Resource-constrained project
scheduling: Notation, classification, models, and methods. European Journal of Operational
Research, 112(1), 3-41.

Chandes, J., & Paché G. (2010). Strategizing humanitarian logistics: the challenge of collective action.
Problems and Perspectives in Management, 8(1)

Chang, Y., Wilkinson, S., Potangaroa, R., & Seville, E. (2012). Managing resources in disaster recovery
projects. Engineering. Construction and Architectural Management, 10, 557-580.

Demeulemeester, E., & Herroelen, W. (2002). Scope and Relevance of Project scheduling. Project
Scheduling, a Research Handbook. Kluwer Academic Publisher: New York, Boston, Dordrecht,
London, Moscow.

Dikmen, N., & Elias-Ozkan, S. T. (2016). Housing after disaster: A post occupancy evaluation of a
reconstruction project. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 19, 167-178.

Dufour, E., Laporte, G., Paquette, J., & Rancourt, M. E. (2018). Logistics service network design for
humanitarian response in East Africa. Omega, 74, 1-14.

D'Haene, C., Verlinde, S., & Macharis, C. (2015). Measuring while moving (humanitarian supply chain
performance measurement-status of research and current practice). Journal of Humanitarian Logistics
and Supply Chain Management, 5(2), 146-161.

Elnashai, A. S., Gencturk, B., Kwon, O.-S., Hashash, Y. M. A., Kim, S. J., Jeong, S.-H., and Dukes, J.,
(2012). The Maule (Chile) earthquake of February 27, 2010: Development of hazard, site specific
ground motions and back-analysis of structures. Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering, 42
(January 2011), pp. 229-245.

FEMA, (2008). Emergency support function Annexes: Introduction. Retrieved on August 4, 2015 from:
https://www.fema.gov/media-library-data/20130726-1825-25045-
0604/emergency support function annexes introduction 2008 _.pdf.

Ferrer, J. M., Ortufo, M. T., & Tirado, G. (2016). A GRASP metaheuristic for humanitarian aid
distribution. Journal of Heuristics, 22(1), 55-87.

Florez, J. V., Lauras, M., Okongwu, U., & Dupont, L. (2015). A decision support system for robust
humanitarian facility location. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 46, 326-335.

Gacasan, E. M. P., & Wiggins, M. W. (2017). Sensemaking through cue utilisation in disaster recovery
project management. /nternational Journal of Project Management, 35(5), 818-826.

Geiger, M. J. (2017). A multi-threaded local search algorithm and computer implementation for the
multi-mode, resource-constrained multi-project scheduling problem. European Journal of
Operational Research, 256, 729-741.

Goldschmidt, K. H., & Kumar, S. (2016). Humanitarian operations and crisis/disaster management: A
retrospective review of the literature and framework for development. /nternational Journal of
Disaster Risk Reduction, 20, 1-13.

Guanxiang, Z., Meng, Z., Zhiyong, Z., & Guihai, L. (2010). An Evaluation Model for Emergency
Logistics System. In Management and Service Science (MASS), 2010 International Conference
on (pp. 1-4). IEEE.

Habibi, F., Barzinpour, F., & Sadjadi, S. (2018). Resource-constrained project scheduling problem:
review of past and recent developments. Journal of Project Management, 3(2), 55-88.

Haiti, Government, (2010), Plan de Accion para la Recuperacion y el Desarrollo de Haiti. Retrieved on
September 8, 2012 at: http://whc.unesco.org/uploads/activities/documents/activity-651-7.pdf.

Haouari, M., Kooli, A., & Néron, E., (2012). Enhanced energetic reasoning-based lower bounds for the
resource constrained project scheduling problem. Computers and Operations Research, 39(5), 1187-
1194.

Harrell, M. C., & Bradley, M. A. (2009). Data collection methods. Semi-structured interviews and focus
groups. Rand National Defense Research Institute, Santa Monica, California. Retrieved on February
12, 2013 at: http:/Awww.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a512853.pdf.

He, Q., Luo, L., Hu, Y., & Chan, A.P.C., (2015), Measuring the complexity of mega construction projects
in China-A fuzzy analytic network process analysis. [International Journal of Project Management,
33(3), 549-563.
M. C. Gonzalez Forero and L. J. Gonzalez Rodriguez / International Journal of Industrial Engineering Computations 11 (2020) 169

Holguin-Veras, J., & Jaller, M. (2012). Immediate resource requirements after hurricane Katrina. Natural
Hazards Review, 13(2), 117-131.

Holguin-Veras, J., Jaller, M. Van Wassenhove, L. N., Pérez, N., & Wachtendorf, T. (2012a). On the
unique features of post-disaster humanitarian logistics. Journal of Operations Management, 30 (7-8),
494-506.

Holguin-Veras, J.. Wachtendorf, T., Jaller, M., & Jefferson, T. (2012b). Logistics and the Management
of Critical Supplies Following Catastrophes. In R. Bissell (editor), Preparedness and Response for
Catastrophic Disasters (pp. 131-150). Uniter States: Taylor and Francis Group.

ISO (1990). International Standard ISO/CD 8402-1 Quality Concepts and Terminology Part One:
Generic Terms and Definitions”, International Organization for Standardization, December.

Ju, C., & Chen, T. (2012). Simplifying multiproject scheduling problem based on design structure matrix
and its solution by an improved aiNet algorithm. Discrete Dynamics in Nature and Society, 2012.
Kalkman, J. P., & de Waard, E. J. (2017). Inter-organizational disaster management projects: Finding the

middle way between trust and control. International Journal of Project Management, 35(5), 889-899.

Kim, K. N., & Choi, J. H., (2013). Breaking the vicious cycle of flood disasters: Goals of project
management in post-disaster rebuild projects. /nternational Journal of Project Management, 31
(2013), 147-160.

Kovacs, G., & Spens, K. M. (2007). Humanitarian logistics in disaster relief operations. /nternational
Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, 37(2), 99-114.

Kovacs, G., & Spens, K. M. (2009). Identifying challenges in humanitarian logistics. /nternational
Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, 39(6), 506-528.

Lombardi, M., & Milano, M. (2012). A min-flow algorithm for Minimal Critical Set detection in
Resource Constrained Project Scheduling. Artificial Intelligence, 182-183, 58-67.

Lin, Y., Kelemen, M., & Kiyomiya, T. (2016). The role of community leadership in disaster recovery
projects: Tsunami lessons from Japan. /nternational Journal of Project Management, 35(5), 913-924.

Lin Moe, T., Gehbauer, F., Senitz, S., & Mueller, M. (2007). Balanced scorecard for natural disaster
management projects. Disaster Prevention and Management: An International Journal, 16(5), 785-
806.

Lu, Y., Luo, L., Wang, H., Le, Y., & Shi, Q. (2015). Measurement model of project complexity for large-
scale projects from task and organization perspective. International Journal of Project Management,
33(3), 610-622.

Makepeace, D., Tatham, P., & Wu, Y. (2017). Internal integration in humanitarian supply chain
management: Perspectives at the logistics-programmes interface. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics
and Supply Chain Management, 7(1), 26-56.

Martinelli, R. J., & Milosevic, D. Z. (2016). Schedule Development. In Project management toolbox:
tools and techniques for the practicing project manager (pp. 171-222). John Wiley and Sons.

Mojtahedi, M., & Oo, B. L. (2017). The impact of stakeholder attributes on performance of disaster
recovery projects: The case of transport infrastructure. /nternational Journal of Project Management,
35(5), 841-852.

Moreno, K. V. (2012). Analisis de la relacion entre estrategias de gestion logistica humanitaria y el
tiempo de respuesta en la atencién de desastres, por medio de la metodologia integral y dinamica.
Universidad de La Sabana, Master Thesis, Chia, Colombia.

Nappi, M. M. L., & Souza, J. C. (2015). Disaster management: hierarchical structuring criteria for
selection and location of temporary shelters. Natural Hazards, 75(3), 2421-2436.

Oloruntoba, R., & Gray, R. (2006). Humanitarian aid: an agile supply chain?. Supply Chain
Management: An International Journal, 11(2), 115-120.

Ophiyandri, T., Amaratunga, D., Pathirage, C., & Keraminiyage, K. (2013). Critical success factors for
community-based post-disaster housing reconstruction projects in the pre-construction stage in
Indonesia. /nternational Journal of Disaster Resilience in the Built Environment, 10, 236-249

Overstreet, R. E., Hall, D., Hanna, J. B., & Kelly Rainer Jr, R. (2011). Research in humanitarian logistics.
Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 1(2), 114-131.
170

PAHO- Pan American Health Organization (2000). Manual for the logistical management of
humanitarian supplies. Retrieved from
http://cidbimena.desastres.hn/docum/ops/libros/manejologistico.pdf, in January of 2013

Patanakul, P., Iewwongcharoen, B., & Milosevic, D. (2010). An empirical study on the use of project
management tools and techniques across project life-cycle and their impact on project success.
Journal of General Management, 35(3), 41-66.

PMBOOK Guide. (2004). A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge. Third Edition. Four
Campus Boulevard. Newtown Square, Pennsylvania. USA

PMI (2004). A guide to the project management body of knowledge. In Project Management Institute
(Vol. 3).

Republic of Colombia, (2011). Decree 4147. Retrieved on September 22, 2012 at:

http://wsp.presidencia.gov.co/Normativa/Decretos/20 1 1/Documents/Noviembre/03/dec414703 1120

11 .pdf.
Pettit, S., & Beresford, A., (2009). Critical success factors in the context of humanitarian aid supply

chains. International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, 39(6), 450-468.

Ransikarbum, K., & Mason, S.J., (2014). Multiple-objective analysis of integrated relief supply and
network restoration in humanitarian logistics operations. International Journal of Production
Research, 54(1), 49-68.

Sadiqi, Z., Trigunarsyah, B., and Coffey, V. (2016). A framework for community participation in post-
disaster housing reconstruction projects: A case of Afghanistan. /nternational Journal of Project
Management, 35(5), 900-912.

Sahebjamnia, N., Torabi, S. A., & Mansouri, S. A. (2017). A hybrid decision support system for
managing humanitarian relief chains. Decision Support Systems, 95, 12-26.

San Cristobal, J. R., (2015). Management Science, Operations Research and Project Management:
Modelling, Evaluation, Scheduling, Monitoring (pp. 1-11). Routledge, NY, USA.

San Cristobal, J. R. (2017). Complexity in Project Management. Procedia Computer Science, 121, 762-
766.

Sheu, J.-B. (2007). An emergency logistics distribution approach for quick response to urgent relief
demand in disasters. Transportation Research Part E, 43(6), 687—709.

SNPAD, Sistema Nacional para la Prevencion y Atencion de Desastres, (2006a). Guia de actuaci6n y
protocolos de alto Gobierno en caso de un desastre subito de cobertura Nacional. Documento
General, Retrieved on November 24, 2012. at:
http://www. gestiondelriesgo.gov.co/snigrd/pagina.aspx?1d=91.

SNPAD, Sistema Nacional para la Prevencion y Atencion de Desastres, (2006b). Protocolo de
actuacion del Presidente de la Republica en Caso de un desastre subito de Cobertura Nacional,
Retrieved on November 24, 2012. at:

http://www. gestiondelriesgo.gov.co/snigrd/archivos/documentos/PROTOCOLOS/Protocolo%20Pre

sidente%20de%201la%20Republica. pdf.
SNPAD, Sistema Nacional para la Prevencion y Atencion de Desastres, (2006c). Protocolo de

actuacion del Ministro del Interior y de Justicia en Caso de un desastre subito de Cobertura
Nacional, Retrieved on November 24, 2012. at:

http://www. gestiondelriesgo.gov.co/snigrd/archivos/documentos/PROTOCOLOS/Protocolo%20Min

istro%20del%20Interior.pdf
SNPAD, Sistema Nacional para la Prevencion y Atencion de Desastres, (2006d). Protocolo de

actuacion del Director de prevencion y atencion de desastres en caso de un desastre subito de
cobertura Nacional, Retrieved on November 24, 2012. at:

http://www. gestiondelriesgo.gov.co/snigrd/archivos/documentos/PROTOCOLOS/Protocolo%20Dir

ector%20de%20PAD.pdt
SNPAD, Sistema Nacional para la Prevencion y Atencion de Desastres, (2006e). Protocolo de

actuacion de los Ministros del despacho en caso de un desastre subito de cobertura Nacional,
Retrieved on November 24, 2012. at:
M. C. Gonzalez Forero and L. J. Gonzalez Rodriguez / International Journal of Industrial Engineering Computations 11 (2020) 171

http://www. gestiondelriesgo.gov.co/snigrd/archivos/documentos/PROTOCOLOS/Protocolo%20Min

istros%20del%20Despacho.pdf.
SNPAD, Sistema Nacional para la Prevencion y Atencion de Desastres, (2006f). Protocolo de

actuacion del comandante de las Fuerzas Militares y el Director de la Policia en caso de un desastre
subito de cobertura Nacional, Retrieved on November 24, 2012. at:

http://www. gestiondelriesgo.gov.co/snigrd/archivos/documentos/PROTOCOLOS/Protocolo%20Fuerza

s%20Militares%20y%20Policia.pdf.
SNPAD, Sistema Nacional para la Prevencion y Atencion de Desastres, (2006g). Protocolo de

actuacion del Procurador y Fiscal General de la Nacion en caso de un desastre subito de cobertura
Nacional, Retrieved on November 24, 2012. at:

http://www. gestiondelriesgo.gov.co/snigrd/archivos/documentos/PROTOCOLOS/Protocolo%20Procur

ador%20y%20Fiscal.pdt
SNPAD, Sistema Nacional para la Prevencion y Atencion de Desastres, (2006h). Protocolo de actuacion

de los medios masivos de informacion publica Nacional en caso de un desastre subito de cobertura
Nacional, Retrieved on November 24, 2012. at:

http://www. gestiondelriesgo.gov.co/snigrd/archivos/documentos/PROTOCOLOS/Protocolo%20Medio

s%20de%20Comunicacion.pdf.
SNPAD, Sistema Nacional para la Prevencién y Atencion de Desastres, (20061). Relaciones entre

autoridades territoriales en caso de un desastre subito de cobertura Nacional, Retrieved on November
24, 2012. at:

http://www. gestiondelriesgo.gov.co/snigrd/archivos/documentos/PROTOCOLOS/08%20Protocolo%20

Autoridades%20Territoriales.pdf.
UNGRD, Unidad Nacional para la Gestion del Riesgo de Desastres (2012). available at:

http://portal. gestiondelriesgo.gov.co/, accessed on: November 8, 2012.

Vahanvati, M., & Mulligan, M. (2017). A new model for effective post-disaster housing reconstruction:
Lessons from Gujarat and Bihar in India. International Journal of Project Management, 35(5), 802-
817.

Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2006). Humanitarian aid logistics: supply chain management in high gear.
Journal of the Operational Research Society, 57(5), 475-489

Van Wassenhove, L. N., & Pedraza Martinez, A. J., (2012). Using OR to adapt supply chain management
best practices to humanitarian logistics. International Transactions in Operational Research, 19(1-2),
307-322.

Vitoriano, B., Ortufo, M. T., Tirado, G., & Montero, J., (2010). A multi-criteria optimization model for
humanitarian aid distribution. Journal of Global Optimization, 51(2), 189-208.

Wilson, M. M., Tatham, P., Payne, J., L’ Hermitte, C., & Shapland, M. (2018). Best practice relief supply
for emergency services in a developed economy: Evidence from Queensland Australia. Journal of
Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 8(1), 107-132.

Yan, L., Jinsong, B., Xiaofeng, H., & Ye, J. (2009). A heuristic project scheduling approach for quick
response to maritime disaster rescue. /nternational Journal of Project Management, 27(6), 620-628.

Zhang, L., Zou, X., & Chen, X., (2012). Resource-constrained Scheduling in Repetitive Projects.
International Journal on Advances in Information Sciences and Service Sciences, 4(14), 287-294.

Zheng, Y., Chen, S., & Ling, H., (2015). Evolutionary optimization for disaster relief operations: A
survey. Applied Soft Computing, 27, 553-566.

Appendix A. Interview questionnaire (original questionnaire was created and applied in Spanish)

Thank you for participating in our study about Colombian relief operations for an earthquake attention.
Your response will be use only for academic purposes.
172
Please answer all questions visualizing that you are attending a sudden and national earthquake of
identical dimensions of the one occurred in Armenia, in 1999. Consider also, the current technical and
technological conditions of Colombian system and not the 1999’s conditions.

Section 1

1. Since you are a member of the coordinating group of the (mention here the indicated
subsystem) area, please tell me what is the objective of this area?
2. When dealing with a national, sudden earthquake, what activities have to be done by

(mention here the indicated subsystem) area for immediate response (during the first
week)?
3. Does the activities have to be executed with specific precedence order? If so, How is that

order?

Section 2
1. Please let me know which are the renewable resources needed in each of the activities you

just mention?
2. How much quantity is needed of each resource in each activity?

Note: Renewable resources are those that are not consumed during the execution of an activity, so that
when the activity ends, the resource remains available to be use in another activity. Some examples are

manpower, machines and equipment.

Section 3
How much time is needed to execute each of the activities with those quantity of resources needed?

© 2019 by the authors; licensee Growing Science, Canada. This is an open access article
@) distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC-
BY BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
