    

e065

ELSEVIE

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

NETWORK &

COMPUTER
APPLICATIONS

Journal of Network and Computer Applications ATP

5° oe

 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jnca

 

Multimedia communication over cognitive radio networks from QoS/QoE

Check for

perspective: A comprehensive survey™ ie

 

Md Jalil Piran®*, Quoc-Viet Pham”, S.M. Riazul Islam*, Sukhee Cho‘, Byungjun Bae‘,

Doug Young Suh“ **, Zhu Han °

@ Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sejong University, Seoul, 05006, South Korea

> Research Institute of Computer, Information and Communication, Pusan National University, Busan, 46241, South Korea
¢ Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, South Korea

4 Department of Electronics Engineering, Kyung Hee Univeristy, Yongin-si, South Korea

© Department of Computer Engineering, Houston University, USA

ARTICLE INFO

Keywords:

Cognitive radio networks
Multimedia communication
Spectrum sensing

Resource allocation management
Network fluctuation management
Delay

Energy efficiency

Quality of service (QoS)

Quality of experience (QoE)
Machine learning

Game theory

1. Introduction

1.1. Background

ABSTRACT

The stringent requirements of wireless multimedia transmission lead to very high radio spectrum solicitation.
Although the radio spectrum is considered as a scarce resource, the issue with spectrum availability is not
scarcity, but the inefficient utilization. Unique characteristics of cognitive radio (CR) such as flexibility, adapt-
ability, and interoperability, particularly have contributed to it being the optimum technological candidate to
alleviate the issue of spectrum scarcity for multimedia communications. However, multimedia communications
over CR networks (MCRNs) as a bandwidth-hungry, delay-sensitive, and loss-tolerant service, exposes several
severe challenges specially to guarantee quality of service (QoS) and quality of experience (QoE). As a result, to
date, different schemes based on source and channel coding, multicast, and distributed streaming, have been
examined to improve the QoS/QoE in MCRNs. In this paper, we survey QoS/QoE provisioning schemes in
MCRNs. We first discuss the basic concepts of multimedia communication, CRNs, QoS and QoE. Then, we present
the advantages of utilizing CR for multimedia services and outline the stringent QoS and QoE requirements
in MCRNs. Next, we classify the critical challenges for QoS/QoE provisioning in MCRNs including spectrum
sensing, resource allocation management, network fluctuations management, latency management, and energy
consumption management. Then, we survey the corresponding feasible solutions for each challenge highlight-
ing performance issues, strengths, and weaknesses. Furthermore, we discuss several important open research
problems and provide some avenues for future research.

providing the basis of this huge volume of data can be named such as
immersive 360°; video, distributed gaming, free-viewpoint video, aug-
mented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR), and extended reality (XR)
(Alvarez et al., 2019). Obviously, compared to the traditional services,

The immense demand for various multimedia services over wire-
less networks is exploding as over four-fifths of the worldwide mobile
data traffic will be video uploading or downloading by 2022 (CISCO
Visual Networking Index, 2019), 38.14 Exabyte out of 49 Exabyte per
month as shown in Fig. 1. Some of the wireless multimedia applications

these multimodal applications require a higher level of quality of ser-
vice (QoS) and quality of experience (QoE). Although it is said that the
spectrum is a scarce resource, the shortage of radio spectrum availabil-
ity is mainly due to inefficient utilization and not scarcity. This fact
was emphasized by Martin Cooper, the father of the cellular phone, in

* This work was supported by the Institute for Information & communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (2018-
0-01364, Terrestrial UHD based disaster broadcasting service for reducing disaster damage), and Korea Electric Power Corporation, (Grant number: R18XA02).

* Principal Corresponding author.
2k ok .
Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: piran@sejong.ac.kr (M. Jalil Piran), vietpg@pusan.ac.kr (Q.-V. Pham), riaz@sejong.ac.kr (S.M.R. Islam), shee@etri.re.kr (S. Cho), 1080i@etri.

re.kr (B. Bae), suh@khu.ac.kr (D.Y. Suh), zhan2@uh.edu (Z. Han).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2020.102759

Received 10 January 2020; Received in revised form 3 May 2020; Accepted 18 June 2020

Available online 15 September 2020

1084-8045/© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/

by-ne-nd/4.0/).
M. Jalil Piran et al.

—4— File Sharing

—e— Audio Streaming
—e@— Web-Data-VoIP
—e— Video(DL/UL)

EB/Month

 

Se oy
Vv Vv

Fig. 1. CISCO predicts that 78% of global mobile data traffic will be video
communication by 2021.

his position paper (Cooper, 2010), when he stated that “our history,
along with an understanding of the potential of known technologies,
demonstrates that spectrum is an asset that cannot be separated from
the technology assets that enable it; that these technology assets are
not finite; and that, in our robust society, they always scale to demand.
That is the genius of our society; our policies should exploit that.”

The traditional spectrum allocation policies are involved with
many technical issues. Like the command-and-control licensing scheme,
such spectrum allocation techniques exclusively allocate the available
resources to a specific operator resulting in spectrum under-utilization.
The schemes in the aforementioned category have several severe con-
straints. For example, it is not possible to change the spectrum licensee
and the type of service offered on that spectrum band. Moreover, the
corresponding access right is location-invariant and the granularity of
the band usage is fixed. In the current spectrum allocation practice,
licensed services seized most of the spectrum bands exclusively. Accord-
ing to the results of spectrum occupancy measurements reported by
Shared Spectrum Company (SSC) (Marko et al., 2016; McHenry, 2007),
a generous portion of the spectrum remains underutilized over a rea-
sonable period of time in most of the US metropolises. For instance,
measurements performed by SSC in the Loring Commerce Center, Lime-
stone, Marine, indicated that approximately 5% of the spectrum is effi-
ciently utilized in bands below 3 GHz. Accordingly, it has motivated
regulatory authorities such as Federal Communication Commission
(FCC) (Ghasemi and Sousa, 2008) to allow cognitive radio (CR) users
to occupy licensed spectrum bands opportunistically without harmful
interference to licensed users by employing CR technology (Haykin et
al., 2016).

In 2002, FCC first set up the Spectrum Policy Task Force (SPTF)
in order to determine and evaluate changes in spectrum regulations
that will improve the public benefits yielded from the use of the spec-
trum resources (Federal Communications Commission, 2002). Further-
more, some other organizations like the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 802.22 Working Group, the US Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), and the Mitre Corpo-
ration have been working on preparing standards and technologies
to access licensed spectrum bands dynamically and opportunistically.
Dynamic spectrum access (DSA) allows secondary users (SUs) to use
the underutilized portions of licensed bands opportunistically, which
is known as spectrum hole (SH) or white spaces (WS). CR was intro-
duced in Mitola (2000) as a new paradigm for the telecommunication
world and has emerged as a candidate technology that enables flexible,
efficient, and reliable spectrum utilization by SUs to use licensed spec-

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

trum bands (Piran et al., 2014a). CR changes its transmission parame-
ters according to the interaction with the radio environment where it
operates. Parameter adaptation is performed based on several metrics
such as operating radio spectrum bands, primary users (PU) behavior,
and network status (Boukerche et al., 2019; Jalil et al., 2013).

According to the unique features of CR such as flexibility, adapt-
ability, and interoperability, it is considered a feasible solution to over-
come the spectrum scarcity issue for the future generations of cellu-
lar communications, i.e., 5G and beyond (Wang et al., 2019; Hong et
al., 2014; Jalil et al., 2018). Therefore, 5G key standardization organi-
zations, including 5GPPP (5G Vision), ITU (Langtry, 2016), and IEEE
(Jiang and Cao), are working on CR, which would be one of the candi-
date technologies and which will enable 5G to become a reality.

Even, the requirement for spectrum bands is further increased to
fulfill many QoS parameters over the multimedia applications. CR is
a feasible solution to tackle the spectrum scarcity issue in multimedia
services (Rahama et al., 2019; Fadda et al., 2012a). The very first con-
cept of flexible mobile multimedia communications was presented in
Mitola (1999). In CRNs, contiguity is no longer required for the selected
bands or sub-channels, and a CR user can transmit packets over non-
contiguous spectrum bands (Russell and Robert, 2018; Popescu et al.,
2014). Since a communication link is created by several sub-channels at
various frequencies, it helps distributed multimedia streaming through
several paths with considerable high overall throughput. Although in
the literature there are a number of survey papers regarding CRNs,
most of them ignored the stringent requirements of multimedia com-
munications. A few of them those considered multimedia transmission
over CRNs also ignored the challenges of QoS/QoE provisioning. How-
ever, in this paper, we study in-depth the feasibility of employing CR for
multimedia applications. In the next subsection, we review the related
survey papers.

1.2. Review of related survey articles

Multimedia communication is continuously experiencing rapid
development because of new opportunities and challenges. CR is con-
sidered a promising candidate technology to be used in this field as dis-
cussed in the previous section. In this context, a considerable number
of techniques and scenarios have been suggested to improve QoS/QoE
of multimedia applications of CRNs. Moreover, in the literature there
exist some survey articles that review different aspects of multimedia
communications over CRNs, as listed in Table 1.

Vibha et al. surveyed opportunistic channel scheduling in CRNs
in Melagiri and Sudarsanan (2015). Spectrum sensing techniques and
MAC protocols were surveyed in Cormio and Chowdhury (2009) and
Luitel and Moh (2018). In Sun et al. (2013), the authors reviewed
several wideband spectrum sensing protocols. Resource allocation and
management in CRNs were the main focus of a survey paper published
by El Tanab and Hamouda (2016). Another survey article was pub-
lished by Fakhrudeen and Alani (2017), which addressed QoS in CRNs
components in general. The proposed approaches primarily deal with
spectrum sensing and decision in general and not specifically for mul-
timedia transmission over CRNs. The aforementioned survey articles
investigated various aspects of CRNs; however, they ignored unique
characteristics of multimedia communications over CRNs.

The main design challenges and principles for multimedia transmis-
sion over CRNs were reviewed in Bicen et al. (2012). Published in 2012,
the authors focused on transport protocols and algorithms devised for
sensor networks and especially smart grid, 500 KV substation, main
power room, etc. He et al. (2015) reviewed QoE for video streaming
over CRNs in 2015. Amjad et al. (2018) reviewed various multime-
dia applications supported by CRNs, routing and link-layer protocols,
QoE design, security requirements, white-spaces, TV white-spaces, and
cross-layer design. Although many topics have been covered in this
paper, its main focus is not exactly on QoS/QoE provisioning challenges
and solutions for multimedia transmission over CRNs. Moreover, it is
Table 1
Summary of the related survey articles.
Survey Year Scope Contributions
CRNs MM QoS QoE Spectrum Resource Fluctuation Latency Energy
Sensing Management Management Management Management
Cormio and Chowdhury (2009) 2009 J J J Spectrum sensing and MAC Protocols for
CRNs.
Bicen et al. (2012) 2012 J J J Transport protocols devised for cognitive
radio sensor networks (CRSNs).
Sun et al. (2013) 2013 J J Wideband spectrum sensing.
Melagiri and Sudarsanan (2015) 2015 J J J Architecture of CRNs,

Opportunistic channel scheduling.
He et al. (2015) 2015 J J J J J Spectrum sensing challenges,

QoE modeling and optimization,

Channel allocation and routing.

El Tanab and Hamouda (2016) 2016 J J J Resource allocation in underlay CRNs.

Fakhrudeen and Alani (2017) 2016 v v v QoS provisioning approaches on spectrum
sensing and decision in CRNs.

Amjad et al. (2018) 2017 J J J J Applications of multimedia cognitive

radio networks (MCRNs),
Design and simulation tools,
medium access control (MAC) and routing

protocols,
Spectrum sensing and sharing.
Luitel and Moh (2018) 2018 J J J Energy efficient MAC protocols for
CRSNs.
Our Survey 2020 v v v v v v v v v CR’s contribution in QoS/QoE

provisioning in MCRNs,

Stringent QoS and QoE requirements for
MCRNs,

Classify the challenge for QoS/QoE
provisioning in MCRNs,

Survey and analyze the state-of-the-art
works on QoS/QoE provisioning in
MCRNs,

Outline several open research problems
and trends.

1a ug NPL ‘WW

6SZZOI (O0Z0Z) ZZI suonvsyddy saindwoD puv y1omay fo Pousmor
M. Jalil Piran et al.

necessary to have an updated survey, whereas this survey paper was
prepared and submitted in 2017.

Motivated by the aforementioned gap, this paper presents a survey
on multimedia communication over CRNs with a focus on QoS/QoE
provisioning in a comprehensive manner. The paper ideally promotes
a new and thorough overview of QoS/QoE provisioning approaches
for multimedia applications over CRNs covering the latest research
trends, understanding the strengths and weaknesses of the suggested
approaches, and offering a guideline for prospective solutions associ-
ated with respective challenges.

1.3. Contributions of this survey article

To this end, this paper presents a comprehensive survey on the chal-
lenges, solutions, and open research problems for QoS/QoE provision-
ing in MCRNs. We tried to include nearly all the published related
papers in recent years. In summary, our main contributions are sum-
marized as follows:

e We provide an in-depth and detailed discussion regarding the advan-
tages of utilizing CR to improve QoS and QoE for multimedia ser-
vices.

e We survey and discuss the stringent QoS and QoE requirements for
different multimedia applications.

e We classify the existing challenges and obstacles for QOS/QoE provi-
sioning in MCRNs, which include spectrum sensing, resource alloca-
tion management, network fluctuation management, latency man-
agement, and energy consumption management.

e We survey the state-of-the-art works and provide an in-depth dis-
cussion about the solutions for each challenge in the literature and
classify them accordingly. We also analyze them in details as well
as outline their pros and cons.

e We outline several open research problems and trends in this
research field for substantial future research.

1.4. Roadmap of the survey

The lists of acronyms and symbols used throughout this paper are
presented in Tables 2 and 3, respectively.

As abstracted in Fig. 2, the remainder of this paper is organized
as follows. In Section 2, we provide the preliminaries for multimedia
communications and CRNs as well as the advantages of utilizing CR
for multimedia communications. Section 3, provides a discussion about
quality assessment for multimedia services. Particularly, we focus on
QoS and QoE and the corresponding evaluation metrics as well as the
challenges for QoS/QoE provisioning in MCRNs. Then we explain each
challenge in details and provide feasible solutions to overcome them
in Section 4. Section 5, presents some open research problem in the
context of QoS/QoE provisioning for MCRNs. Finally, Section 6 draws
the conclusion.

2. Multimedia services and CRNs

Multimedia is the integration of multiple forms of media data such
as text, animations, graphics, audio, images, and video. In recent years,
multimedia communications received plenty of attention, where the
users are not only the consumers but also providers. As an example
according to Statistics-2019, almost two billion users upload more than
300 h of video to Youtube every minute and almost 5 billion videos are
watched on Youtube every single day. Multimedia applications can be
categorized as:

e Conversational Applications such as voice services where the time
variations between data entities of the stream are maintained and
are very sensitive to delay, jitter and loss.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

Table 2
List of acronyms.
Acronym Meaning
AR Augmented Reality
BER Bit Error Rate
BP Blocking Probability
CA Carrier Aggregation
CD Covariance-based Detection
CDMA Code Division Multiple Access
CFD Cyclostationary Feature Detection
CP Collision Probability
CRNs Cognitive Radio Networks
DP Dropping Probability
DSA Dynamic Spectrum Access
DWT Discrete Wavelet transform
ED Energy Detection
EE Energy Efficiency
FD Feature Detection
FGS Fine Grain Scalable
GA Genetic Algorithm
HO Handoff
GBR Guaranteed Bitrate
GOP Group of Pictures
HMP Hidden Markov Process
HMM Hidden Markov Model
LDPC Low-Density Parity-Check
MCRN Multimedia Cognitive Radio Networks
MFD Matched Filter Detection
MGS Medium Grain Scalable
MIMO Multiple-Input Multiple-Output
MOS Mean Opinion Score
MWSN Multimedia Wireless Sensor Networks
NALU Network Abstraction Layer Unit
PLR Packet Loss Ratio
PSNR Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio
PVQM Perceptual Video Quality Measure
PU Primary Users
QoE Quality of Experience
Qos Quality of Service
SE Spectrum Efficiency
SINR Signal-to-Interference-Plus-Noise Ratio
SNR Signal-to-Noise Ratio
SVC Scalable Video Coding
TRA Transmission Rate Adaptation
UDP User Datagram Protocol
VR Virtual Reality
WES Waveform-based Sensing
ws White Space
XR Extended Reality

e Streaming Applications such as video streaming that is loss-tolerant
but sensitive to delay and jitter.

e Interactive Applications like web-browsing that work based on best-
effort and request-response pattern and are not delay-sensitive com-
pared with the other two above-stated applications.

e Background Applications in which the destination is not expecting to
receive the service at any specific time, such as e-mail services.

Multimedia transmission in both real-time and non-real-time
requires various QoS metrics that include throughput, latency, jitter,
packet loss rate, and bit-error rate (Paul and Pandit, 2018; Lee et al.,
2014a). The quality of multimedia services strictly depends on these
types of performance characteristics. Effective coding protocols such
as MPEG-4 and H.264 can compress multimedia files to reduce the
required bandwidth. In order to handle the video encoder output bitrate
according to different situations, the quality of multimedia can be
improved using rate control in multimedia coding. On the other hand,
highly compressed multimedia contents is vulnerable to packet-loss and
it is therefore of vital importance to design error resilience encoders.

To cope with the issue of explosive growth in the quantity of mobile
subscribers and multimedia service competing for scare radio resources,
effective network planning is an important task that needs to be con-
M. Jalil Piran et al.

Table 3
List of symbols.
Symbol Meaning
a Compression parameter
Lr Average packet loss
Xo Idle steady state probability
Ny Busy steady state probability
67 AWGN noise variance
Y Throughput
y SNR
A Rate-distortion model parameter
A Transition rate
B Total bitrate
A Distortion
é, Packet error rate
F. Frame rate
Ho Absence of primary signal
H, Presence of Primary Signal
M MOS
Onn PSNR of BL
Q, PSNR
Qsy PSNR at the SU side
T, Transmission rate
u Number of SUs
wy Modulation and coding scheme coefficient
o(s) Conditional limitation for a specific state
0 Energy detector threshold
é Over-provisioning factor
a Usage parameter
bar, Bitrate of BL
bi, Bitrate of EL;
D. Processing delay
D; Delay in layer i
Dic Delay at logic link control
Dyac Delay at MAC layer
Dy Propagation delay
Dory Delay at physical layer
Drot End-to-end delay
Dre Delay threshold
EB PU’s bit energy
E, SU’s bit energy
h(t) Channel gain
K Total number of active PUs
LBR Link balance rate
M Number of primary channels
M, Total occupied sub-channels
Niate Number of idle channels
No Noise contribution
Ny Number of non-overlap subchannels
Prlocking Blocking probability
P aropping Dropping probability
Pra Probability of false alarm
Prd Probability of miss-detection
Pi, Transmission power
Po Idle channel probability
P, Busy channel probability
P, Packet loss probability
R, Received signal strength
S State set

sidered (Jalil et al., 2013; Piran et al., 2015a). There are many types
of technologies that have been examined by mobile operators to meet
these types of challenges by increasing the network capacity with
additional radio resources, more antenna, (e.g. input multiple-output
(MIMO)), dual carrier, and CR.

As one of the potential candidate technologies, CR has received
plenty of attention to be considered in 5G cellular networks (Roy et
al., 2017; Hu et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018a; Kakalou et al., 2017; Iqbal
et al., 2017; Hong et al., 2014; Mavromoustakis et al., 2015; Adigun
et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015; Jalil et al., 2017) and many confer-
ences and workshop organized by well-known organizations are held
or going to be organized focusing on CR as one of the solution for

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

spectrum management (IEEE International Conference on Communi-
cations, 2018; CROWNCOM 2018; COCORA 2018; 5G Wireless with
Cognitive Radio and IoT, 2017; The 1st EAI International Conference
on 5G for Future Wireless Networks, 2017; CORAL 2016; CRAFT 2016,
2016; CRAFT 2015, 2015; Workshop on Emerging Massive MIMO and
MillimeterWave Technologies, 2016; Saad and Bennis, 2015; Sun, 2016;
Grace, 2014). Fig. 3 shows a schematic view of a CR-based 5G HetNet.
In such a network, different small cells are allowed to operate on both
licensed and unlicensed bands. It is worth noting that 3GPP has already
decided in a meeting held in December 2018, in Sorrento to include
support for 5G New Radio (NR) unlicensed spectrum called as 5G unli-
censed spectrum (NR-U) in the Rel-16.

The reason for considering CR as one promising candidate tech-
nology for spectrum management in the next generation of cellular
network is that there are many common and similar characteristics
between 5G cellular networks and CRNs:

1. Inter-working with various technologies and networks.

2. Adaptation, according to the access network principles in 5G and
the features of the licensed networks in CRNs.

3. New and flexible protocols according to the need for new protocols
for physical and data-link layers.

4. An advanced terminal, that is able to sense the radio bands having
smart and decision capabilities.

5. End-to-end integrated resource management that includes all the
networks, which are handling data communication process.

In summary, 5G is perceived to rely on an integrated framework
consisting of different kinds of networking technologies, and CR will
bring a new dimension to the radio access diversity therein. Basically,
5G through WISDOM integrates and interconnects all the wireless tech-
nologies, and CR adapts and works with all the wireless technologies.
5G-WISDOM brings the convergence concept, and CR represents the
technologies tools to implement it (Badoi et al., 2010).

In addition, there are many ongoing standardization activities for
CR, which implies that CR will be no longer be a theory but a technol-
ogy. It will be considered as a practical candidate technology (Granelli
et al., 2010). IEEE started a set of standardization projects related to
CR called IEEE 1900 that is involved with the IEEE Standards Coordi-
nating Committee 41 (SCC41), which was recently renamed the IEEE
DySPAN Standards Committee (DYSPAN-SC) (IEEE DySPAN Standards
Committee, 2019). Some examples of famous active ongoing projects
are:

e IEEE 802.22 as the first worldwide achievement to design a stan-
dardized air interface that works based on CR, focusing on some
projects including “wireless broadband for rural areas” and “super
WiFi” or “WiFi on steroids” (IEEE 802.22-2011, 2011).

e IEEE 802.11af (aka. White-FI) started in January 2010 with the aim
of adopting 802.11 for TV band operation and now is working on
“WiFi extension to TV white space (TVWS)” (Flores et al., 2013).
802.11laf leverages the maximum use of WiFi but taken into con-
sideration the constrained because of propagation features and the
congestion in unlicensed bands, implementing wireless broadband
systems in the TV bands (Flores et al., 2013).

e IEEE 802.16h ratified as “air interface for broadband wireless
access systems amendment 2: improved coexistence mechanisms for
license-exempt operation” and currently working on “WiMax exten-
sion to TVWS” (Lee et al., 2016).

e JEEE 802.15 task group 4m (TG4m) working on “extension PAN
Standards to TVWS” in order to determine a PHY protocol for
802.15.4 and to improve and add functionality to the existing
802.15.4—-2006 MAC in order to achieve TVWS regulatory require-
ments (Aijaz and Aghvami, 2015).

e IEEE 802.19.1 is working on “Co-existence of several white space
systems” (Filin et al., 2016).
M. Jalil Piran et al.

1. Introduction

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

Background

Related Works

 

—l

 

Contributions of this Survey

2. Multimedia Services and CRNs

 

h

QoS

 

 

3. Quality Assessment
for Multimedia Services

QoE

 

 

QoS/QoE Provisioning in MCRNs |]

 

QoS/QoE Provisioning in MCRNs
Spectrum Sensing
+4 Resource Allocation Management

 

 

 

6. Conclusion

4. QoS/QoE Provisioning in MCRNs:
Challenges and Solutions

H5. Open Research Problems

 

 

Network Fluctuations Management

+y Latency Management
4 Energy Consumption Management

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 2. The organizational structure of the survey.

e IETF PAWS Protocol to access TVWS as a device-database commu-
nication protocol (Mancuso et al., 2013).

e ECMA-392 determining a physical layer and MAC sub-layer for SUs
in TVWS (Baykas et al., 2012).

e And many others like Fairspectrum (Fairspectrum), CogEU (Cogni-
tive radio systems for efficient sharing of TV white space in Euro-
pean context), Spectrum Bridge (ShowMyWhiteSpace - Locate TV
White Space Channels).

Many other standardization bodies that are actively working include
the FCC in the USA (FCC), OFCOM in the UK (Ofcom), Industry Canada
(Communication Research Center Canada), FICORA (Finland) (The
Finnish communication Regulatiory Authority), CEPT ECC SE43 (EU)
(The European conference of Postal and Telecommunications Adminis-
trations), and many others.

The ultimate goal of network operators is to satisfy the users by pro-
viding high-quality services. Based on the above-mentioned discussion
CR can be utilized to in order to:

e Provide reliable communication regardless of time and location.

e Efficiently utilize the radio spectrum bands.

e Assign the best accessible channel that can satisfy the service
requirement according to the delay-sensitive, and the bandwidth-
hungry and pack-loss tolerable multimedia applications.

e Utilize the bands in both licensed bands and unlicensed bands with
the help of carrier aggregation.

e Alleviate the network fluctuations by simply adjusting the transmis-
sion and selecting the best bitrate of the video in an adaptive man-
ner.

Furthermore, the multimedia communication trend is getting plenty
of attention over the recent years and the industry experienced a rapid
grow, especially with the popularity of social networks as well as emer-
gence of new charming multimedia applications such as AR, VR, etc.
The user of multimedia services expect high quality services and it has
been reported by Conviva that 75% of online video viewers leave the
poor-quality video in only 4 min (How Consumers Judge their Viewing
Experience). Therefore, in order to improve QoS as well as the users’

experience, it is of vital importance to employ new kind of technologies
for multimedia transmission. We emphasis again that many statistics
proved that a considerable portion of the released spectrum bands is
not utilized efficiently (Marko et al., 2016; McHenry, 2007). As we dis-
cussed already, CRNs is considered as one of the promising candidate
technologies to overcome the issue of spectrum scarcity and hence make
it a feasible solution in order to improve QoS and QoE in multimedia
media services as well (Dasilva et al., 2018).

Based on the CR’s capabilities, it can be utilized by a diverse range
of networks to provide different multimedia services including video
surveillance, social welfare, real-time services, video broadcast, safety,
health and entertainment applications, etc. We identify some other CR-
based networks and list them in Table 4.

3. Quality assessment for multimedia services

According to the popularity of multimedia services, it becomes ever
more critical for the service providers to improve the QoS and QoE of
the end-users. In this section, we delve in depth the concept of quality
assessment for multimedia applications.

3.1. Qos

In ITU-T Recommendation E.800 (ITU, 1988), the QoS has been
stated as “the collective effect of service performances which determine
the degree of satisfaction of a user of the services”. In other words,
QoS is the capability to cater to various priorities to diverse applica-
tions, data flows, and users, or to ensure a given level of performance to
data traffic. In particular, for multimedia applications, QoS is the con-
cern of the continuous multimedia transmission. Providing a transmis-
sion guarantee is of vital importance with inadequate network capacity.
This should be taken into account especially for real-time multimedia
transmission, such as video conferencing, Internet telephony, IPTV, and
online games (Piran et al., 2016). Some applications may need minimal
latency and reliable response time, whereas some other applications
may solicit a high image quality. The five categories of QoS parameters
are shown in Table 5 (Tsalianis and Economides, 2000).
M. Jalil Piran et al.

Core Network

Relay

ee

__\<~~ 5G dedicated bands

     

<«———» Wireline backhaul

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

      
      
   

Metro-cell

 

Cr

  

~~ White spaces

Fig. 3. Different small cells compose a CR-based HetNet operating over both licensed and unlicensed bands.

© QoS Classes

QoS demands for multimedia services have been considered by var-
ious standardization bodies, such as the ITU, The European Telecom-
munications Standards Institute (ETSI), and the 3G Partnership Project
(3GPP). The major standard recommended by ITU is in Recommen-
dations Y.1541 (ITU-T 1541, 2015), F.700 (Recommendation F.700,
1996), and G.1010 (ITU-T, 2001). Moreover, the broadband satellite
multimedia (BSM) is a working group that belongs to ETSI and provides
technical reports and standards that maintain a framework to determine
QoS demands for broadband satellite networks based on the Internet
Protocol suite.

Generally, providing a reliable QoS with wireless networks involves
many issues because of the high dynamics of wireless channels. QoS
optimization is more challenging in CRNs because of additional inter-
ference from incumbents. Hence, interference management is the most
important issue with CRNs design. As previously stated, CR is supposed
to operate opportunistically with licensed bands, such as TV spectrum
bands. However, TV channels have a very narrowband spectrum e.g.
6%8 MHz width (ETSI 300 744, 1997). Hence, QoS optimization with
narrow TV bands for high bandwidth data-traffic is challenging. This

issue can be exacerbated by increasingly stringent QoS demands of
multimedia services. Therefore, the employed QoS techniques in CRNs
must consider a practical and context-oriented view of the CR systems
as well. CR supports a mechanism for the flexible pooling of spectrum
bands by employing new protocols known as radio etiquette. The band-
width availability can be expanded for conventional uses using this.
Since the bands in CRNs are not exclusively dedicated to SUs, QoS pro-
visioning is more challenging compared to the other types of wireless
networks.

Different multimedia services have different attributes. Table 6
presents different multimedia traffic classes with their corresponding
characteristics and requirements including (3GPP, 2016; U. Recomen-
dation; Wolf, 2019; Henry and Szigeti, 2019):

© QoS Class Identifier (QCD) is an identifier that is shown by an integer
number from 1 to 9 indicating various QoS performance attributes
of each IP packet.

e Traffic class is also a QoS parameter, which is used to map different
services onto different bearers in such a way that the requirements
of each service are satisfied. Different traffic classes are conversa-
tional, streaming, interactive, and background.
M. Jalil Piran et al.

Table 4
CR-based networks.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

Network
WSNs

IoT
Cellular communications

WiMax

Aeronautical communications
Ad Hoc networks

Satellite communications
Space communications

UAVs

Vehicular Ad Hoc networks (VANET)
Information-centric networks
Smart grid

HetNets

Mesh networks

TDMA

OFDM

Research

Wang et al. (2018), Shah et al. (2014), Liang et al. (2011), Bradai et al. (2015), Abbasi and Mirjalily
(2017) and Abbas et al. (2015)

Ding et al. (2018)

Jalil et al. (2017), Li et al. (2013), Vijayarani and Nithyanandan (2017), He and Mao (2014), Xu et al.
(2014), He et al. (2016a, 2016b), Hu and Mao (2012) and Zhu et al. (2014)

Ghahremani et al. (2012)

Jacob et al. (2016)

Teng and Song (2017)

Jia et al. (2016)

Murugan and Sumithra (2019)

Santana et al. (2018)

Ghanshala et al. (2018), He et al. (2016c), Hongli et al. (2015) and Bradai et al. (2014)

Si et al. (2016) and Han et al. (2014)

Jiang (2016), Bicen et al. (2012), Bu and Yu (2014) and Hou et al. (2013)

Donglin and Shiwen (2012)

Ali et al. (2014a) and Soltani and Mutka (2013)

Chaoub et al. (2011a)

Farsi and Jafarian (2013)

Table 5

QoS parameters for different application categories.

Category Parameters

Performance-oriented
Format-oriented
Synchronization-oriented
Cost-oriented
User-oriented

e Resource type is determined as either guaranteed bit rate (GBR) or
Non-GBR. In GBR, the expected bandwidth of the bearer is guar-
anteed, while in case of Non-GBR, the bearer is a best effort type
bearer and there is no guarantee on bandwidth.

e Priority is given to different traffic classes based on their importance
and ranges from 1 to 9.

e Traffic handling priority (THP) is defined only for the interactive
classes. This type of classes enables prioritization between bearers
and thereby enables user or service prioritization. THP ranges from
1 to 3, where the value 3 holds the lowest priority.

e Symmetry indicates whether the traffic is unidirectional or bidirec-
tional.

e Real-time traffic in which the packets are expected to arrive in a
given time.

e Delay is the end-to-end delay, which equals the time taken by a
packet to traverse from a source to a destination in a network.

e Jitter is the variation in delay that negatively degrades QoE.

e Packet Loss Rate (PLR) is the allowed rate of lost packet.

e Protocols that support the traffic class including user datagram proto-
col (UDP), session initiation protocol (SIP), voice over Internet pro-
tocol (VoIP), real-time streaming protocol (RTSP), real-time trans-
port protocol (RTP), transmission control protocol (TCP), hyper text
transfer protocol (HTTP), simple mail transport protocol (SMTP),
post office protocol (POP), file transfer protocol (FTP), Internet mes-
sage access protocol (IMAP).

e Services that are supported by each class.

QCIs 1 and 2 are real-time conversational classes. Class 1 covers ser-
vices, such as conversational voice, VoIP, and voice telephony, while
the services in Class 2 are the live streaming of conversational voice
and video calls. In these classes, the time variation between informa-
tion entities of the content (minimum delay) is preserved and a conver-
sational pattern, such as stringent and low delay and jitter, is followed.
These two classes are the most delay-sensitive traffic classes among the
others. In terms of error tolerance, conversational voice services and

End-to-end delay and bit rate

Video resolution, frame rate, storage format, and compression scheme
Skew between the beginning of audio and video sequences
Connection and data transmission charges and copyright fees
Subjective image and sound quality

video are error tolerant where some other services, such as Telnet, are
considered error intolerant.

QCI 3 covers services, such as real-time gaming and robotic appli-
cations that are absolute error intolerant. However, services in QCI 4,
such as streaming audio and video are error tolerant to some degree.
Delay and jitter requirements are not as strict as with conversational
classes. In these two classes, there is a perverse time variation between
information entities of the stream but it allows lag for a starting point.
One-way streaming relies on buffering and time alignment performed
on the client side.

QCIs 5 to 8 covers interactive services, which are based on request-
response patterns and preserve payload content. The interactive class
enables prioritization between packet data protocol (PDP) contexts,
which allows end-user or service prioritization. IMS signaling is a ser-
vice that falls in QCI 5. QCIs 6, 7, and 8 are different with different
service priorities. QCI 6 covers high-priority, buffered video streaming,
and TCP-based services like email, chat, FTP, P2P file sharing, and pro-
gressive video streaming. Medium-priority services, voice, live video
streaming, interactive gaming, and AR are the services in QCI 7, and
low-priority and best-effort services such as buffered video streaming,
and TCP-based services fall in class 8. Finally, QCI 9 is assigned to
the background class and includes buffered video streaming, and some
other services for non-privileged subscribers. In the class, the clients do
not expect the data within a given time and preserve the payload con-
tent. Best-effort is acceptable for data delivery. This is the least-delay
sensitive traffic class such as FAX and email arrival notifications.

Fig. 4 shows the QoS model for wireless networks including four
layers. In the first layer, which is the network availability layer, QoS
from the service provider viewpoint is defined, while the second layer
defines the user’s viewpoint of the fundamental requirements for all
other QoS parameters and aspects. In the third layer, service access,
service integrity, and service retainability are defined. Finally, in layer
4, different services are located, and their output is the QoS factors that
are perceived by the end user.
Table 6
QoS classification and requirements.
QCI Traffic Class Resource Type Priority THP Symmetry Real- time Delay [ms] Jitter [ms] PLR Protocols Services
1 Convers- GBR 2 N/A Two- Yes 100 <10 < 3% UDP, Conversational Voice,
way SIP, VoIP, Telephony
ational VoIP
2 Convers- GBR 4 N/A Two- Yes 150 < 50 < 3% UDP, Live Streaming of
way RTSP Conversational Voice,
ational Video Call
3 Streaming GBR 3 N/A one-way Yes 50 N/A 0 UDP, Real-time Gaming,
RTP Robotic
4 Streaming GBR 5 N/A one-way No 300 < 50 <1% UDP, Buffered Video
RTSP Streaming
5 Interactive Non- 1 1 Two- Yes 100 N/A 0 TCP, IP Multimedia System
GBR way RTP (IMS) Signaling
6 Interactive Non- 6 1 Two- No 300 < 50 <1% TCP, High-priority, Buffered
GBR way FTP video streaming,
TCP-based services.
7 Interactive Non- 7 1 Two- Yes 100 < 100 <1% TCP, Medium-priority, Voice,
GBR way HTTP, live video streaming,
VoIP interactive gaming, AR
8 Interactive Non- 8 3 Two- Yes 300 < 100 <1% TCP, High-priority &
GBR way SMTP, Best-effort, “Premium
POP bearer” for multimedia,

Buffered multimedia
streaming, TCP-based
services, for premium

subscribers
9 Back- Non- 9 N/A Two- Yes 300 < 200 < 3% TCP, Best-effort, “Default
ground GBR way FTP, bearer” for Buffered
IMAP video streaming,

TCP-based services,
non-privileged
subscribers

‘Ja UD PPL ‘IN

6SZZOI (O0Z0Z) ZZI suonvsyddy saindwoD puv y1omay fo Pousmor
M. Jalil Piran et al.

   

¢ Network
Accessibility

  
   
  

  

  

¢ Network
Availability

   
      
  

¢ Service

Accessibility ¢ Audio Streaming
* Service Integrity ¢ Web surfing
° Service ° Data

Retainabilit

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

¢ File Sharing

     
   
  

   
   
   
 

¢ Video UL/DL

Fig. 4. Four-layer QoS.

In a nutshell, QoS is the network’s contribution to QoE. However,
not only QoS has impact on the QoE, but quality of application (QoA)
also matters, i.e., QOE = QoA + QoS. Without considering the network-
layer QoS, achieving an ideal QoE is not feasible. After the realization
of the QoS, now it is the time to introduce and discuss the QoS metrics
in details.

e QoS Evaluation Metrics

We are going to compare different techniques and models proposed
to improve QoS and/or QoE based on QoS/QoE metrics in the following
two subsections, and explain in details the dominant QoS/QoE evalua-
tion metrics.

(i) Bit Error Rate (BER) is the number of bit errors that occur per
unit of time. BER is calculated by dividing the number of bit
errors by the total number of transmitted bits during a specific
period of time and it is often expressed as a percentage.

Packet Loss Ratio (PLR) has a very direct and negative effect on
the QoS. Multimedia services have a maximum loss tolerance
(depending on encoding, only loss of a certain fraction of all
packet can be tolerated). In this context, information loss may
happen because of several reasons, such as bit errors or packet
loss during transmission and quality degradation during coding,
such as coding in low bitrate for voice.

Blocking Probability (BP) is the probability that the required level
of service quality cannot be provided. BP leads to increasing the
outage probability of current SUs, such as the probability that the
user is outside the service coverage area, or affected by interfer-
ence. A new SU is blocked when there is no idle channel to be
assigned to it. Thus, the blocking probability of all unlicensed
users in a CRN is calculated as (Jiang et al., 2012):

BP = Xs
Nidie=0.SES

(ii)

(iii)

(1)

where Nigie is the number of free channels and 7, is the steady
state probability.

Collision Probability (CP): A collision between a PU and an SU
happens when a PU returns to a channel that is being used by
an SU as illustrated in Fig. 5. This event degrades both PU and
SU communications and needs to be taken into account in CRNs
strictly. Normally, because of higher access priority of PU to the
primary channels, SUs must vacate and transmit their communi-
cation to another channel before a PU returns. The packet colli-
sions during the transmission are considered as interference since
the collided packets are assumed to be lost. If we consider Py and
P, as the probabilities that a channel is idle and occupied by a
PU, respectively, then the probability of packet loss due to colli-
sion is as follows:

N
Pp x1-(-%) «o(((d inh?) < °) 6)
n-1

(iv)

(2)

10

(v

V

vi

—

bebe

bmi

=1-(1— 1%) (1—Pya) Zo Po» Pr):

where N is the number of licensed channels and 7, and yo are
the steady state probability that the channel is occupied and
idle, respectively. The steady state probability that determines
whether a channel is free or occupied is calculated as:

_— Po
P, |.
Dropping Probability (DP): The forced termination probability can
be computed as the number of terminated secondary connections
divided by all SU connection requests that include both the ter-
minated and complete SU connections. It is a must in CRNs that
upon arrival of PUs, the SU that uses a primary band must leave
it, switch to another available channel, and resume its transmis-
sion. The total forced termination probability for SUs is (Jiang et
al., 2012):

M
_ La0s),,-0e8 Lent LN — Niatel 4}
SK fay )”:~™

where 6(s) is the conditional constraint for a specific state and M
is the number of subchannels.

Latency end-to-end latency is limited by the speed of light
but also by the intermediate network nodes (e.g. routers) and
has a very direct and negative effect on the end-user satisfac-
tion depending on the application. Based ITU-T G.1010 (ITU-T,
2001), delay is defined as “the time taken to establish a partic-
ular service from the initial user request and the time to receive
specific information once the service is established”. The total
end-to-end latency is computed as:

Py 1
1-P,

[Zo 41] = [Xo 11] | (3)

DP ; (4)

7 7
Drot ~ » D; + Dy +D, = {Pr + Dyrac + Dire + » v} (5)
i=1 i=3

+D,+D,,

where Dj is the delay in layer i, D, is the propagation delay,
and D, is the processing delay. Normally, the delay in the upper
layers is dependent on traffic loading, protocols, and delay in
the lower layers. The propagation and processing delays are
dependent on the distance between the user terminal and the
BS, and the implementation process respectively. According to
ITU-T Rec. G.1028, Table 7 illustrates how the end-to-end delay
may affect the quality of voice (Szuprowicz, 1995).

Jitter or delay variations, is an essential performance parame-
ter of a network intended to support real audio and video. Of
all multimedia types, real-time audio is the most sensitive mul-
timedia type to network jitter, because the packet inter-arrival-
time on the client side is not constant even if the packet inter-
departure time on the sender side is constant. Consequently, the
M. Jalil Piran et al.

Primacy Channel 1
Primacy Channel 2

Primacy Channel 3

SU Transmission

Frame 2

Occupied

Frame 1

(_} Idle

aS Sensing

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

 

a Transmission

 

Fig. 5. Collision take place if an occupying SU does not vacate the channel before PU arrival.

Table 7
The impact of end-to-end delay on voice streaming quality.

Delay [ms] Voice Perception

> 600 Voice is unintelligible and incoherent

600 Voice is barely coherence

250 Voice is annoying but comprehensible

100 Imperceptible different between audio and real voice

50 Humans cannot distinguish between audio and real voice

viii

ix

packets received by the client have a different delay, which is
called as jitter. It has a great effect on the quality of delivered ser-
vices, especially when decoding video or audio stream. The jitter
can be handled in an intolerant application to delay variations
by buffering and effectively eliminate delay variation perceived
on the client side.

Energy Efficiency (EE) is the number of bits that can be transmit-
ted over a unit of power consumptions and is measured by bits
per Joule. In wireless communications, the measuring metric of
EE for UEs is the power needed to transmit data. Normally, the
transmission power required for a transmission rate r(t) at chan-
nel gain A(t) by a SU is:

1 (or _ )
ancy (2-1);
where yw is modulation and coding scheme coefficient and can be
computed as in Jiang et al. (2016). The inherent features of CR
pose tough challenges in provisioning QoS for acceptable QoE
and achieving high EE requirements.

Spectrum Efficiency (SE) is the data rate per frequency band mea-
sured in [bit/sec/Hz]. Dynamic channel allocation improves the
SE through sharing the available spectrum in a cell. In Luby
(2002), SE has been evaluated in terms of successful transmis-
sion probability of the required number of packets needed to
recover the original multimedia content. The authors in Chaoub
et al. (2011b) and Pham et al. (2015) considered a distributed
multimedia transmission framework over shared lossy CRNs in a
TDMA mode. They claimed that, in terms of SE, their framework
outperforms the other similar frameworks by allowing the sys-
tem to increase its ability to transmit multimedia content on a
given channel by decreasing the traffic average on some specific
time slot that has been assigned to an SU.

Throughput, as the data output from a channel averaged over a
time interval, is computed as follows (de Baynast et al., 2008):

P,,(t) = (6)

 

 

P. M;
we T; P viet logo(y)
M;
Y = ——-.TY STS, (7)
Po—P P. P
1- = JT, + oe Ta + oT:
( ya T; ) 1 ve T; d a T; 2

where Py and P, is the number of successful and unsuccessful
packet transmissions respectively, re , J; is total number of time

11

slots, M; is the number of idle sub-carriers, y; is modulation per
sub-carrier, Tj is a slot duration, and T, is the duration between
the time that a packet has been sent and the time that its ACK
is received. And T, is the maximum delay after the time that a
packet has been sent and before determining that the packet is
lost (de Baynast et al., 2008).

3.2. QoE

QoE is considered as the perceptual QoS from the users’ point of
view. The user perceived quality is more important than just consider-
ing QoS metric for multimedia communication over CRNs. For multi-
media transmission the end-user satisfaction is directly dependent on
the perceptual quality of the received video on the client side, and QoE
is the major role for the quality evaluation model of the delivered ser-
vice. Thus, QoE is a factor to measure the end-user satisfaction with
the received video quality. QoE ties together user perception, experi-
ence, and expectations to application and communication system per-
formance, which is normally expressed by QoS parameters. The quan-
titative relationship between QoS and QoE is needed in order to be
able to maintain an effective QoE control scheme onto measurable QoS
factors (Goudarzi, 2013). There are a great deal of research work that
considered QoE as a main metric to measure the performance of the
proposed techniques (Huang et al., 2012, 2015a; Bicen et al., 2012;
Goudarzi, 2013; He et al., 2016a, 2016b; Saki et al., 2014a; Wang et
al., 2017; Wu et al., 2014; Jiang et al., 2012; Luo et al., 2011; Saki and
Shikh-Bahaei, 2015; Yao et al., 2015; Dey and Misra, 2018; Sudipta and
Saha, 2017).

QoE can be modeled in two ways, subjective and objective (Zhao
et al., 2017). In a subjective test that is based on ITU standard (ITU,
2008), some experts are invited to watch the delivered video and score
the perceived quality into some metrics, such as the mean opinion score
(MOS), which is also known as absolute category rating, or degradation
MOS (DMOS) metrics. MOS as a subjective measure and a low com-
plexity substitute metric for peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) for the
perceived service quality, computes the visual quality of a multime-
dia content based on not only network conditions, such as PLR, net-
work latency, but also the type of multimedia traffic and characteristics
(Wang et al., 2017). Normally, MOS is obtained as the average of the
absolute ratings collected for each delivered content, and the DMOS is
obtained as the average of the arithmetic difference between the rat-
ings of the delivered content and the original content (Brunnstrom et
al., 2009). This type of subjective evaluation is not considered as an
efficient metric because of the limited observers and assessors, limited
distortion types, and high expenditure.

On the other hand, in the objective quality assessment approaches,
a factor is evaluated as a function of QoS metrics (such as PLR, latency,
jitter, bitrate, and frame rate) and some other external factors that
include the type of content, viewer demography, and device type (Maia
et al., 2015). Normally, the objective models popular metrics include
M. Jalil Piran et al.

moving picture quality metric (MPQM), perceptual video quality mea-
sure (PVQM), and visual signal-to-noise ratio (VSNR) (Moorthy et al.,
2017).

There are many metrics based on what QoE would be measured,
however in the literature, a few of them are used. The metrics that are
employed to assess the performance of the suggested solutions will be
explained in the next sections.

e QoE Evaluation Metrics

QoE assessments factors fall into two categories, reliability and qual-
ity. Reliability performance is defined as the ability of an entity to per-
form a required function under some specific circumstances and in a
given period of time. Reliability is measured based on different factors
including mean-time-to-failure (MTTF), mean-time-to-repair (MTTR),
mean-time-between-failures (MTBF), and percentage of time available
as a function of MTBF and MTTR. MTTF is the mean time expected until
the first failure of a piece of equipment and a basic measure of relia-
bility for non-repairable systems. MTTR is the expectation of repair for
a statistically significant number of repairs carried out from the instant
a fault has been reported to the instant the service restored for use by
the client and usually is expressed as an arithmetic mean. And MTBF
is a reliability term used to provide the number of failures per million
hours for a service. Actually, MTBF = MTTF + MTTR.

Another QoE evaluation category is the service quality, which
assesses the quality of the delivered services and the end-user satisfac-
tion. In the case of multimedia transmission, service quality is measured
based on the following factors.

(i) Interruptions occur when the playback of the content is stalled
temporarily. It happens due to network failures when it cannot
support the requested stream or the requested content cannot be
transcoded fast enough for the stream. In the case of network
failures, the reason would be delay, jitter, low bandwidth and
handoff. Thereby, data may arrive with a variable rate. Thus,
client-side buffering is a solution for playout delay to compensate
for these problems. However, buffering more than a logical limit
causes a negative impact on the user experience, as shown in
Fig. 6. Moreover, the frequency of buffering results in annoying
interruptions.

Distortion is caused by content compression on the server side
and PLR in the network. The compression distortion depends on
the rate of the multimedia stream and factors of the distortion
model, which are affected by the encoded video sequence and
the encoding structure (Zhou et al., 2010). The total distortion
for channel j is (Piran et al., 2015b):

(ii)

_ Drp
L  (LBR—€).P).a
ie pout
1

A =a|L,+|1-—Lyexp (8)

where a depends on the parameters related to the compression,
Ly is average packet loss because of transmission error, Drp
is delay threshold, LBR is the link balance rate, € is an over-
provisioning factor, and a is a parameter that indicates whether
link | is being used for transmission.

PSNR is evaluated in the form of distortion modeling as a contin-
uous function of the video sequence rate or discrete values based
on the number of received scalable layers. Thereby, on the server
side and before transmission, PSNR as a linear function of bitrate
is calculated as:

(iii)

N
Q; = O(B — bz) + Wp, =A) DE, + Qz,, (9)
i=0

where 8B is the total bitrate of the video sequence, which is the
sum of the bitrate of the base layer (BL) (bg, ) plus the sum of the
bitrate of the enhancement layers (ELs) (b,, ), and (A) is the rate-
distortion (R — D) model parameter, which is selected based on

12

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

the spatial-temporal features of the content and the codec. On
the SU side, which is based on the packet loss ratio in BL, bz,,
PSNR of the received content is:

N
Qu =O (» — bpy » bn) + Opr.

i=0

(10)

iv MOS is the most popular subjective factor measurement. Tradi-

tionally, the quality of delivered content was evaluated in terms
of PSNR or distortion rate as a QoS measurement scale to evalu-
ate the efficiency of the multimedia streaming techniques. PSNR
can be stated as the average of the corresponding assessments
over all the frames (Jalil et al., 2017). The drawback of this
measurement technique is that it does not consider the visual
masking phenomenon.
In wireless networks, because of the network fluctuations, the
channels condition does not remain the same over the time.
Hence, packet loss cannot be completely avoided, and it is one
of the common challenges affecting MOS as shown in Table 8.
Therefore, to calculate MOS, different metrics are required to be
taken into account, such as frame rate F',, transmission rate 7,,
packet error rate €, because of handoff and poor channel quality,
modulation 7, and coding scheme o:

a, + AF, + a3(InT,)

M =
1+a,€,+a5(E,)?

(11)

1
1+e"(SINR—o)’
are derived by a non-linear regression of the prediction model

with a collection of MOS values as in Khan et al. (2010).

where €, = and the coefficients a,, aj, a3, a4 and a,

Table 8 presents the impact of different QoS metrics on QoE based
on ITU-R M.1079-2 (U. Recomendation; Alliance, 2013). It is worth not-
ing that those values are the minimum requirements; however, recent
applications need much higher throughput e.g., 3 Mbps for standard
definition (SD) in the resolution of 480p, 3 Mbps for high definition
(HD) in 720p, and 25 Mbps for ultra high definition (UHD) in 4Kp.

3.3. Challenges for QoS/QoE provisioning in case of MCRNs

A critical issue in CRNs is building a feasible solution for dynamic
spectrum allocation efficiently. To solve this problem, bandwidth
demands as the simplified QoS uniform assumption for spectrum assign-
ment must be considered. Furthermore, SUs’ explicit QoS requirements
for various multimedia services must be taken into account, otherwise
SUs repeatedly hand-off to other channels to find the best available
channel for successful transmission, which results in quality degrada-
tion. Consequently, in order to provide and guarantee QoS and QoE for
multimedia transmission over CRNs five main challenges arise. First,
how to sense spectrum bands and discover spectrum opportunities.
Second, how to manage the available resources with the main objec-
tive without interfering with any PU and provide minimum QoS/QoE
for SUs. Third, according to the many changes in the availability and
quality of channels in CRNs, network fluctuation management is of
vital importance. Fourth, multimedia services are delay-sensitive and
how to overcome the issue of latency must be taken into account
while designing special algorithms for multimedia services over CRNs.
Finally, energy consumption management is a critical issue for these
types of approaches to make a balance between consumed energy and
channel selection in order to provide the best video quality while min-
imizing power consumption. We will explain the above-stated issues
in details along with feasible and practical solutions in the following
section.

4. QoS/QoE provisioning: challenges and feasible solutions

In the previous section we outlined the main challenges for
QoS/QoE provisioning in MCRNSs as:
M. Jalil Piran et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

Packets departed from source 1 2 8 f4|s \6 "7 is

Packets arrive at buffer G Fy
Time in buffer VIiViviv bs
Packets removed from buffer eer ra 8

<> Gap in playback

me PP

0 5

Fig. 6. Buffering and late packets.

Table 8
Impact of some QoS Metrics on QoE.

QoS Metrics
Delay PLR Throughput BER
< 2s 0.0 % 0.2% > 500 kbs <1x10
< 4s 0.2 % 0.5% > 250 kbs 1 x 10°*-4 x 10%
< 8s 0.5 % 2.0% > 120 kbs 4x 10°*-8 x 1074
< 15s 2.0 % 4.0% > 60 kbs <8 x 10°*-1 x 10°
> 15s >4.0% < 60 kbs >1x 10°

. Spectrum Sensing

. Resource Allocation Management

. Network Fluctuations Management
. Latency Management

. Energy Consumption Management

aBWN FH

In this section, we first study the abovementioned challenges for
multimedia services over CRNs and then present state-of-the-art solu-
tions for each challenge category. We investigate the proposed solutions
and compare them based on the corresponding metrics. Moreover we
highlight advantages and disadvantages of the available solutions and
at the end of each part, we provide summary and higher level insights.

4.1. Spectrum sensing

Spectrum sensing by far is the most important function of CR that
enables it to trade the surrounding radio environment. Spectrum sens-
ing is a considered as a prominent candidate technology to overcome
the issue of spectrum scarcity (Ansere et al., 2019). Spectrum sensing
has been considered by many standards, such as IEEE 802.22 (IEEE
802.22-2011, 2011), and 802.11k (Wireless LAN Medium Access Con-
trol (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, 2008), because
of its relatively low infrastructure cost and its compatibility with the
licensed systems (Ghasemi and Sousa, 2008). With the help of sens-
ing functionality, the CR users are able to sense and adapt to the
electromagnetic environment where they operate, discover, and utilize
the white spaces opportunistically without harmful interference to the
incumbents in order to maximize throughput and facilitate interoper-
ability.

QoS provisioning in spectrum sensing can be achieved through spec-
trum sensing accuracy and spectrum efficiency. The spectrum sensing
mechanism has a direct impact on QoS and QoE, while frequent spec-
trum sensing increases the media access control (MAC) layer processing
overhead and latency and thereby increases PLR as well as causes some
multimedia packets to miss the receiving deadline, and thus negatively
affecting QoE (Huang et al., 201 1a).

13

10 15 20
Time[sec]
QoE Metrics

PSNR MOS Quality Impairment
> 37 5 Excellent quality Imperceptible
31-37 4 Good quality Perceptible, but not irritating
25-31 3 Fair quality Slightly irritating
20-35 2 Poor quality Annoying
< 20 1 Unacceptable Annoying

The spectrum sensing in CRNs depends on the received signal-to-
interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR). Generally, two types of errors may
happen while sensing the activities of the licensed users, which is called
the false-alarm and the miss-detection. The miss-detection error hap-
pens when the user fails to sense the primary signal that results in
interference to PUs by the SU. On the other hand, false-alarm error hap-
pens when the sensing function falsely declares a primary signal, which
results in a waste of spectrum resources (Piran et al., 2015b). Assuming
Rayleigh fading channels (Jin et al., 2015), miss-detection probability
Pq, false-alarm probability P;,, and detection probability Py, are as fol-
lows using complete and incomplete gamma and generalized Marcum
Q-Functions:

N
H, : Presence of Signal if (2 inh?) > 0,
n—1

 

N (12)
Hy, : Absence of Signal if (2 eum) <0,
n—-1
~ 2 r(m,$)
Po =P 4 (Delnd )>e1m be (13)
reet-e((3-1-) 5) a
@ M2 1/@ 2 147 m—-1
P,=e 2 —( — — 15
co? ala) (57) a9)

m—2 _ k
x exit _eF » i _ OY _ ,
Ak! \ 20 +7)

where R, is strength of the received signal, © is the energy detection
threshold, 5? is additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) noise variance,
Uf is the total number of active SUs, y is signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and
YN (R, [n])” is the output of the integrator, and the upper incomplete
gamma function is defined as the integral from I(a, x) = I t?-le-tdt
(Atapattu et al., 2009). The primary signals are modeled as a two-state
M. Jalil Piran et al.

Markov chain: Hy, and H,. From (13), the probability of false-alarm
and SNR are independent. Thus, when #/, is satisfied, it means that a
PU is active on the channel. The relation between miss-detection and
false-alarm probabilities (Lee and Yeo, 2015) are stated as:

Pra = Q(V Ny + OL —PmaVT +27),

where W is the number of spectrum sensing samples as in Lee and Yeo
(2015). Based on IEEE 802.22 standard (IEEE 802.22-2011, 2011), it
is usually supposed that miss-detection probability is 0.01 < Py, <0.1
and false-alarm probability is0.9 < Py < 0.99.

In the following, we provide an overview of different proposed tech-
niques for efficient spectrum sensing.

(16)

4.1.1. Spectrum sensing techniques

In CRNs, spectrum sensing is performed to achieve DSA capability,
where the PU and unlicensed users can share a spectrum band, and also
achieve coexistence. DSA functionalities are:

e Interference avoidance: PUs and SUs work in an orthogonal manner
that uses time division multiple access (TDMA) and frequency divi-
sion multiple access (FDMA) techniques, in such a manner that the
interference from SUs to the PUs must strictly be avoided.

e Interference control: Both types of users operate in the same band but
use a threshold, and the interference from SUs is controlled in order
to guarantee QoS requirements.

e Interference mitigation: Using some information regarding the PUs,
SUs decode the primary transmission that allows them to intercept
the PU’s message in certain cases.

In order to allocate the spectrum dynamically, a reliable spectrum
sensing function must be used in the physical layer on the SU side.
Most of the existing spectrum sensing functions already proposed in the
literature are included in the six following categories:

4.1.1.1. Energy detection (ED). ED, a.k.a. radiometry or periodogram,
was proposed as an alternative technique to detect primary signals in
noise. ED as an efficient and fast no-coherent technique is widely used
to compute a running average of signal strength over a window of pre-
determined spectrum length (Piran et al., 2015b; Tahir et al., 2012).
The detector detects the signal strength over a specific licensed band
during a certain interval and discovers the holes if the energy of the
received signal is less than the threshold. According to the IEEE 802.22
standard, a ED-equipped sensor should be able to satisfy the sensing
sensitivity requirement e.g. as low as —20 dB (IEEE 802.22-2011, 2011;
Liang, 2020). ED can be performed in three ways as follows.

e Cooperative spectrum sensing: In this mode, the information of avail-
able channels is exchanged among SUs. Fig. 7 depicts a cooperative
spectrum sensing scenario where SUs collect information regarding
the available channels and send it to an information processing cen-
ter through a CR-based BS, which mixes all the sensing information
and makes a decision about the status of a licensed-user (Arjoune
and Kaabouch, 2019; Caso et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2015; Wei et
al., 2019). Cooperative sensing function can be conducted in three
modes: centralized (Zheng et al., 2013), distributed (Liao et al.,
2014; Nitti et al., 2016), and relay-assisted (Akyildiz et al., 2011).

e Non-cooperative spectrum sensing: In this model, the SUs with dedi-
cated sensing periods perform sensing operations by estimating the
energy of primary signals (Tuan and Koo, 2016; Chen et al., 2019).

e ON/OFF model-based sensing (Askari and Aissa, 2014): Multiple
antenna types are utilized with a hybrid self-interference suppres-
sion (SIS) approach in this model of spectrum sensing.

Compared to matched filter detection, although ED requires a longer
sensing time and knowledge of the noise power and cannot differentiate
between the sources of the received signals, it does not need any pri-
ori information of the PU activities such as modulation scheme, pulse

14

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

 

Fig. 7. Cooperative spectrum sensing schema.

shape, packet format, band of operation, and center frequency, and it
is more efficient in terms of cost and complexity. To alleviate the issues
of shadowing, fading, and the time-varying nature of wireless channels,
cooperative spectrum sensing techniques are proved to be more effi-
cient compared to non-cooperative methods (Aripin et al., 2009; Ma et
al., 2008; Balakrishnan, 2017; Heo et al., 2014; Ganesan and Li, 2007).
In such schemes, a decision is made based on information collected
from several SUs.

In Ma et al. (2008), a soft combination and detection for cooperative
spectrum sensing was proposed, which is based on Neyman-Pearson
criterion, and the optimal soft combination was obtained. The authors
proved the maximal ratio combination to be near optimal in the low
SNR area and reduced the SNR wall. An optimal linear cooperation
framework for spectrum sensing was provided in Quan et al. (2008)
with the objective of accurate detection of the weak primary signal
and considering the effect of Gaussian noise. In the paper, the local
measurements were weighted by weighting coefficients and optimized
according to the probabilities of detection and false alarm.

To improve the performance of real-time multimedia transmis-
sion using cross-layer design over CRNs, a scheme was proposed in
Thirunavukkarasu et al. (2013). Indeed, this scheme is an extension
of the proposed approach in Luo et al. (2011) to multichannel cognitive
MAC and optimize it by considering the optimal channel allocation con-
ducted according to channel sensing order in Cheng and Zhuang (2011).
The system was not aware of PUs’ activities, and the ED-based sensing
was applied. For PU protection and achieving the highest throughput
for the SUs, the optimal sensing time for energy detection was consid-
ered. SUs are supposed to have a single transceiver and perform video
transmission in a unicast manner.

Although ED is a popular spectrum sensing technique according to
its advantages such as low computational cost, there are some inherent
issues that include 1) how to determine the threshold, 2) unable to dif-
ferentiate primary signals signal from noise, 3) low performance under
low SNR regimes, 4) unable to detect spread spectrum signals, 5) high
false-alarm errors due to noise uncertainty, and 6) very unreliable in
low SNR regimes.

4.1.1.2. Feature detection (FD). With more complexity and by having
information about the carrier frequency of the modulation type, FD is
another spectrum sensing approach that is able to cover some draw-
backs of the ED using known properties of PUs’ signals (Mingchuan et
al., 2015; Anyim et al., 2018). The FD schemes utilizing the cyclic pre-
fix portion of the symbols enable the CR to detect primary signals even
among noise and interference according to the signal characteristics
that include carrier frequency, bit rate, and cyclic prefixes. FD is robust
M. Jalil Piran et al.

against noise uncertainty and a more efficient detection approach in
low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) regimes compared to ED. The FD tech-
nique is able to distinguish different types of transmissions and primary
systems. However, specific features, such as cyclostationary features,
must be carried with primary signals. Also, specific characteristics are
required to be introduced, such as cyclic prefix in orthogonal frequency-
division multiplexing (OFDM) communications.

FD also can be used in combination with ED as studied by Fadda
et al. (2012b). The authors presented a two-stage signal detection in
TVWS by combining ED and FD in the wavelet domain. They divided
470-790 MHz band by means of the Discrete Wavelet Packet Transfor-
mation (DWPT) into sub-bands where the signal power is calculated. In
order to identify the modulation schemes, modulation classifiers based
on the parameters of the signal in wavelet domain were used as fea-
tures.

4.1.1.3. Matched filter detection (MFD). An MEFD, as a solution to detect
stationary Gaussian noise, is a candidate technique for spectrum sensing
if SUs have sufficient knowledge of the structure of the primary signal
(Tandra and Sahai, 2005). The presence of a specific PU is detected
by correlating its signal with the received signal. MFD maximizes the
received SNR in the presence of additive stochastic noise. MFD is more
efficient to noise uncertainty and a better detection under low SNR
regimes compared to FD. Moreover, it requires fewer signal samples to
achieve good detection. MFD requires only O(1/SNR) samples to sat-
isfy a set of detection requirements. However, according to a growth
of the available primary bands that have been released for secondary
usage, MFD detection is not efficient in terms of cost and complexity,
but rather the need of priori knowledge for primary signals and requires
coherency and synchronization with PUs’ signals.

4.1.1.4. Cyclostationary feature detection (CFD). CFD works based on
the periodic variations of the statistical parameters of practical com-
munication signals (Enserink and Cochran, 1994; Gardner, 1991). This
approach normally characterizes the received signals based on period-
icity or Geostationary. The required data for CFD are provided by a
spectral-correlation density function (Gardner, 1991). The authors in
Dayana and Kumar (2016), studied the issues involved with network
spectrum sensing by utilizing the methods of PU detection through CFD
using a cooperative system. They used universal filtered multi-carrier
(UFMC) in conjunction with CFD in order to improve the system per-
formance and design simplification with an optimum detection of —23
dB. Dayana and Kumar (2016) employed CFD with universal filtered
multi-carrier spectrum sensing for CRNs in order to improve the system
performance.

CFD can distinguish PU signals from noise, can differentiate between
different types of signals, performs well in low SNR environments, and
is capable of estimating accurately the carrier frequency and symbol
rate. Although CFD is a valid technique in low SNR regions and is robust
against interference, it requires prior information (cyclic frequencies of
PUs’ signals) and has a high computational cost.

4.1.1.5. Covariance-based detection (CD). Another spectrum sensing
technique is CD, in which the difference between the statistical covari-
ance’s of the primary signals and noise are used to discriminate the
presence or absence of PUs. In Zeng and Liang (2009), a PU detec-
tion algorithm is proposed, which a sample covariance matrix is com-
puted based on some samples of the received primary signals. Two
test statistics were obtained from the sample covariance matrix. Con-
sequently, the presence of a PU was determined according to the differ-
ences between the two test statistics. The authors in Oner and Jondral
(2004) employed spectral correlation density and spectral coherence
function for spectrum detection. CD does not require any prior infor-
mation of PUs’ signals and performs well in low SNR environments.
The disadvantages of CD are its high computational complexity and

15

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

low performance as PUs’ signals, received at the SU, tend to be uncor-
related.

4.1.1.6. Waveform-based sensing (WFS). If in a network the signal pat-
terns like preambles and midambles, the transmitted pilot patterns, the
spreading sequences are known as waveform-based sensing or coher-
ent sensing, which is a promising spectrum sensing candidate tech-
nology. In this method, the sensing function is performed by correlat-
ing the received signal with a given copy of itself. The performance
of this method is correlated with the length of the known signal pat-
terns (Tang, 2005). The authors in Cabric et al. (2006) claimed that
waveform-based sensing needs short measurement time but is associ-
ated with synchronization errors.

WES does not require any priori information of PUs and is an effec-
tive technique for wideband signals. However, it does not work for
the spread spectrum signal, has a high computational complexity, and
requires high sampling rates for characterizing the entire bandwidth.

4.1.2. Summary and higher level insights

We have studied different spectrum sensing techniques and com-
pared them accordingly as listed in Table 9. In CRNs, there is a severe
competition between PUs and SUs in order to utilize spectrum bands for
data transmission; however, PUs have a higher priority because of the
exclusive right that they hold. To guarantee the right, SUs must avoid
any harmful interference to PUs. Thereby, SUs need to perform spec-
trum sensing before any transmission and even during their communi-
cations. Spectrum sensing is a cornerstone for SE in CRNs. An optimal
spectrum sensing technique must be able to detect spectrum opportuni-
ties, determine spectrum resolution of the discovered spectrum oppor-
tunities, predict the spatial directions of possible PU arrival as well as
categories PUs’ signals.

In conclusion, cooperative sensing strategies outperform non-
cooperative counterparts in terms of reliability, SE, sensing time, as
well as EE; however, the cooperative sensing strategies are dependent
on the number of cooperative SUs. We have compared a variety of dif-
ferent sensing techniques, and among them, MFD and CSD are coherent
while ED and WFS are non-coherent. In terms of accuracy MFD and
WES have the highest accuracy, but in the price of the higher complex-
ity. Although ED has a low accuracy, it is a good candidate sensing
technique in terms of low complexity.

4.2. Resource allocation management

CR allows the reuse of unused portions of the frequency spectrum by
unlicensed users in an opportunistic and non-interfering manner with
licensed users. To perform this functionality, a CR users needs to be able
to investigate the spectrum and apply an adaptive learning approach
based on observations of the PU activity. Via this investigation, an SU
is capable of discovering spectrum opportunities, such as non-utilized
frequency channels in a specific time-slot that are available to be shared
to the secondary systems. Once the spectrum opportunities are discov-
ered, CR should distribute the available unused channel to the other
SUs in a range. This problem is known as resource allocation, which is
the ultimate goal of allocating a single channel to every communica-
tion link in order to improve the spectrum utilization and consequently
maximize the network capacity.

The general resource management approaches for CRNs in the lit-
erature are not applicable to multimedia services due to heterogeneous
traffic nature of various types of applications that include different
QoS requirements, preferences for the utility function, the priority of
accessing the available spectrum holes, traffic rate requirement, and
capabilities of communication in different bands (Shiang and van der
Schaar, 2008). Efficient channel allocation for multimedia application
over CRNs results in reducing the spectrum handoff, latency and
M. Jalil Piran et al.

Table 9

Comparison of spectrum sensing approaches.

WES

CD

CFD

MFD

FD

ED

Parameter

Cabric et al. (2006),

Zeng and Liang (2007,
2009), Dhope and

Piran et al. (2015b), Mingchuan et al. (2015), Tandra and Sahai Dayana and Kumar

Tahir et al. (2012),

Research

Tang (2005), Wornell
(1996) and Tian and
Giannakis (2006)

(2016), Gardner (1991),

(2005), Kapoor et al.

Anyim et al. (2018), Kim
and Shin (2008), Yue et
al. (2010) and Lin and

He (2008)

Simunic (2012) and

Oner and Jondral (2004)
and Sadeghi and Azmi

(2008)

(2011), Salahdine et al.

Digham et al. (2007),

Baghel and Khan (2015)

(2015) and Shobana et

al. (2013)

Abdulsattar and Hussein
(2012), Thien et al.

(2018) and Patil et al.

(2018)
Bad

Average

Good Good

Average

Good

Performance in
Low SNR
Conditions

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Needs PUs’

Information

High High Medium Medium High

Low

Computational
Complexity

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Distinguish

Different Users

Medium
No

Medium

High
Yes

Short
Yes

Medium

High
No

Sensing Time
Coherency

Medium

Medium
High

High

Medium

Medium

High

Low

Accuracy

16

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

distortion, as well as maximizing the delivered video quality and
consequently improving QoE.

Spectrum allocation schemes are categorized as cooperative and
non-cooperative methods. Cooperative resource allocation in CRNs is
performed according to the respective characteristics in two modes that
include centralized, distributed or even a hybrid of the two, which
combines centralized and distributed architecture into a scalable con-
trolled peer to peer network (Ali et al., 2018a). On the other hand,
non-cooperative spectrum access is another scenario that is applica-
ble for CRNs, in which each SU works to maximize its own benefit
without necessarily taking global system performance into account.
Non-cooperative spectrum access is also known as selfish or non-
collaborative spectrum access. Selfish access has a trade-off to be con-
sidered since on one hand the non-cooperation may result in a reduced
SE, but on the other hand, there is a reduced overhead in communi-
cation required among the SUs as seen in cooperative sharing (central-
ized or decentralized). Therefore, in non-cooperative spectrum access
the concept of competition arises when a particular user tries to exploit
the CR channel for self-enrichment, which prompts the other user to the
same. This results in chaos and inefficient utilization of spectrum. Coop-
erative centralized and distributed resource allocation methods along
with their pros and cons are presented in the following subsections.

4.2.1. Resource allocation management methods

e Centralized Resource Allocation Management

In the centralized mode (Wu and Kuo, 2012; Hu and Mao, 2012;
Omer et al., 2016; Jing et al., 2016; He et al., 2016b; Jiang et al., 2012,
2016; Zhu et al., 2014; Li et al., 2013; Bu and Yu, 2014; Mihov, 2012;
Chen et al., 2011a; Saki and Shikh-Bahaei, 2015; Hu et al., 2009), a cen-
tralized entity, such as BS in cellular networks, controls the resources
and access procedure. The central managing entity collects local obser-
vations from multiple SUs, and decides the accessible channels through
some decision fusion rule and informs the SUs about the available chan-
nels. A MAC layer protocol with sensing capability is of vital importance
to allocate resources fairly among SUs while avoiding interference to
PUs.

In such frameworks, due to the need of message exchange between
the users and the central entity (e.g.the common coordinator) it is asso-
ciated with some technical issues such as message overhead and delay,
which are fatal issues for QoE in video streaming schemes. In particu-
lar, for multimedia transmission over CRNs, since tolerable delay does
not allow propagating global information back and forth throughout
to a central controller, it seems that centralized resources management
is not very efficient compared to the distributed resource management
approaches. As a result, according to the fact that wireless networks
are decentralized in terms of context information, the complexity of the
optimal centralized solutions for resource management in CRNs and
particularly for multimedia services are not reasonable.

e Distributed Resource Allocation Management

Distributed resource allocation management solutions (Huang et al.,
2012; Saadat et al., 2013; Geetha and Sagayee, 2016; Shiang and Van
der Schaar, 2009; Shiang and van der Schaar, 2008; Chaoub et al.,
2011a; He et al., 2016a; Abbas et al., 2015; Chaoub and Ibn-Elhaj,
2014; Xu et al., 2014; Soltani and Mutka, 2013; Shiang and Van Der
Schaar, 2008a; Zekavat and Li, 2006; Chen et al., 2010a; He and Mao,
2014; Fattahi et al., 2007; Hu and Mao, 2010; Donglin and Shiwen,
2012; Kushwaha et al., 2008; Niyato and Hossain, 2008; Larcher et al.,
2004; Zhou et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2011b) are typically suggested
for the cases where constructing an infrastructure is not feasible or
reasonable. In the distributed approaches such as a multi-hop CRN,
the SUs collect and exchanges their local detection information with
each other without demanding a backbone infrastructure, which dra-
M. Jalil Piran et al.

matically reduces the implementation cost. Thus, resource allocation
and access mechanisms are based on local or even global regulations,
which are performed by each node in a distributed manner. This kind of
resource management architecture leads to sub-optimal utilization (but
almost close to global optimal utilization), and power overhead than
the centralized framework. The major drawback of distributed resource
allocation approaches is a certain delay associated with collecting the
required data and exchange among various nodes, whereas the infor-
mation is decentralized (Ding and Xiao, 2010; Yong and Li, 2013).

4.2.2. Resource allocation management models and techniques

CR has been widely accepted as the most promising candidate
technology for alleviating spectrum scarcity. CR aims to exploit both
licensed and unlicensed spectrum bands in an efficient way in three
modes, which include interweave, overlay, and underlay. Each of the
modes needs a different cognition level about their operating environ-
ment and a different sophistication level which leads to various issues.

In interweave or opportunistic spectrum access, SUs try to recognize
WSs in frequency, time, or space where there is no active PU. The power
level of SUs is restricted by detection of the range of the PUs’ activity.
Frequency agility or having wide-band front end for white-space detec-
tion is the requirement of SUs in this mode. The improvement of spec-
trum usage is performed by opportunistic frequency reuse over WSs.
Thus, SUs need to periodically monitor PUs activity on the desired spec-
trum bands, transmit their data over WSs without any harmful interfer-
ence in an opportunistic manner.

In overlay mode, sophisticated signal processing and coding, such
as dirty paper coding (DPC), is used by CR to maintain or improve the
communication of PUs while capturing extra spectrum bands for SUs’
communications (Javadi et al., 2017). In this mode, SUs are required
to be aware of transmitted data sequences (messages), channel gains as
well as the encoding procedure of the sequences (codebooks). SUs may
try various ways to obtain the codebook, for example, PUs periodically
broadcast their code-books or PUs follow a uniform communication
standard based on a publicized codebook, which is known to SUs. The
information regarding messages and codebooks may be used to remove
the excessive interference caused by SUs at the primary receiver. Fur-
thermore, SUs use those information to allocate part of their power for
their transmission and the remaining power to maintain or improve
enhance PUs’ communication. Hence, the interference from SUs to PUs
may be offset by using part of the power of SUs to relay the PU’s data
sequences. SUs are allowed in licensed bands to reciprocate the avail-
able bandwidth with PUs, and there is no harmful interference and
even improve PU communication. In unlicensed spectrum bands, SUs
enable better spectrum usage efficiency by using information regarding
PU messages and codebooks to mitigate the interference.

SUs may operate in underlay mode while they obey strict trans-
mission power constraints. Concurrent transmissions of PU and SU are
possible only if SU interference at the primary receivers is less than
a reasonable threshold, for instance, interference temperature (Le and
Hossain, 2008). SUs may specify the interference at a specific primary
receiver by overhearing a transmission from a given PU if both PU and
SU have access to a reciprocal link. SUs should estimate the interference
to primary receivers by cooperative sensing or sounding and exploiting
channel reciprocity. The interference threshold imposes a limit on the
total power spectral density per dimension received from SUs at any
primary receiver. SUs’ interference is limited by applying an average
received power per dimension limitation or a peak received power per
dimension limitation at PUs. For time-variant channels, performance
requirements of PUs are based on an average interference power limita-
tion over time or a specific interference limitation at each time instant.

In the following, we survey and classify the feasible and already
proved resource allocation techniques applicable for multimedia trans-
mission over CRNs in order to guarantee QoS/QoE as listed in Table 10.

17

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

4.2.2.1. Machine learning-based__resource_ allocations _ techniques.
Machine learning is supposed to provide a mechanism to guide
the system reconfiguration by knowing the environment perception
results and device reconfigurability in order to maximize the utility
of the available resources (Zhou et al., 2018a). SUs are aware of
their environment in nature, but in order to be fully cognitive, they
need to be equipped with learning and reasoning capabilities. Using
machine learning, the cognitive engine would be able to coordinate the
actions of the CR users. Recently, applying machine learning to CRNs
has become an interesting research topic (Sumathi and Manivannan,
2019; Li et al., 2018a; Jhajj et al., 2018). As an example, learning
techniques can be used to estimate wireless channel features and to
choose a specific coding rate that results in reduction of possible errors.
Different classes of machine learning are applicable to CRNs.

e Supervised learning for spectrum sensing (Li et al., 2018a), channel
estimation, channel selection (Umbert et al., 2018), MAC protocol
selection (Qiao et al., 2016), learning and classification of PU behav-
iors (Agarwal et al., 2016), spectrum sharing (Anandakumar and
Umamaheswari, 2018), optimal resource allocation (Shrestha and
Yoo, 2018), PU boundary detection (Wang and Yao, 2018), etc.

e Semisupervised learning for PU emulation attack detection and pre-
vention (Srinivasan et al., 2019), automatic modulation recognition
(Li et al., 2018b).

e Unsupervised learning for cooperative spectrum sensing (Jin et al.,
2019), clustering the available channels, user associations, PU
arrival detection [],SE (Liu et al., 2018b), modulation classification
(Mendis et al., 2016).

e Reinforcement learning for spectrum sensing (Zhang et al., 2018),
user association in small cells, spectrum access and sharing (Yang
et al., 2018; Jiang et al., 2018), EE (Liu et al., 2018c), security (Ling
and Yau, 2019).

In the following, we study some of feasible machine learning algo-
rithms for QoS/QoE provisioning in MCRNs. We classified and com-
pared the techniques and presented them in Table 11.

e Decision Tree

A decision tree is a decision support tool that operates based on a
tree-like graph or mode of a decision and corresponds to possible conse-
quences that include chance event outputs, resource costs, and utility.
A decision tree is used to model an algorithm that contains conditional
tool statements. In operational research, decision trees are used widely,
and specifically for decision analysis, in order to aid the identification
of a strategy most likely to achieve a goal. They are also a favorite tech-
nique in machine learning. The decision tree shows all possible options
in a decision-making problem by using various paths.

As shown in Fig. 8, the root is the decision maker and the states are
at the ending branches of the tree (Soltani and Mutka, 2013). In termi-
nology of decision theory, the set of possible states (choices) available
to the decision maker is represented by S = {5),59,...}. The node O[0]
is the decision maker. The set of actions that the decision maker can
take is represented by A = {a,,d),...}. At the starting point of a prob-
lem, the decision maker performs an experiment to discover additional
data in support of an action. Performing experiment e is not mandatory
and the nodes may go for eg, which implies not performing an experi-
ment. The experimental work considered in Soltani and Mutka (2013)
monitored the duration of availability of the channels that connect the
node O[0] to its neighbors. The possible output of the experiment is
02;, which is the maximum duration of channels available in spectrum
bands between O[0] and its neighbor j. The outcome of e9 is 2), which
corresponds to no observation.

Using the decision tree and in being able to estimate the state of
spectrum bands and nodes in supporting video frames QoS, a sample
and posterior distribution were considered with the goal of improv-
ing the precision of correct decision making in CRNs in Soltani and
Mutka (2013). The focus was on the unicast transport of multimedia
M. Jalil Piran et al.

Table 10
Resource allocation management models/solutions for MCRNs.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

Model/Solution

Machine Learning

Game Theory

Cross-layer Optimization

Miscellaneous

Bayesian Model
Clustering Algorithm
Genetic Algorithm
Decision Tree
Markov Model

Multi-agent Learning

Simulated Annealing
Nash Equilibrium
Strategic-form
Mechanism-form
Auction

Closed-form Expression
Column
Generation-based
Algorithm

Dynamic Programming
Fountain Code

Greedy Algorithm

Non-linear Programming
Lift-and-Project
Multi-channel Mode

Carrier Aggregation
DWT

Fuzzy Theory

Graph Theory
Priority-based Algorithm

Research

Huang et al. (2014, 2020) and Piran et al. (2015b)

Bradai et al. (2015) and Shah et al. (2014)

Huang et al. (2011b, 2012), Farsi and Jafarian (2013) and de Baynast et al. (2008)

Soltani and Mutka (2013)

Bicen et al. (2012), Bhattacharya et al. (2011), Ansuman et al. (2015), Wu et al. (2015), Si et al. (2016),
Mansour et al. (2009), Sudipta and Saha (2017), Jalil et al. (2017), Dastpak et al. (2012), Ali and Yu
(2009), Jiang et al. (2012), Yu et al. (2011a) and Chen et al. (2011b, 2013)

Shiang and Van der Schaar (2009), Shiang and Van Der Schaar (2008a), Shoham et al. (2006) and Qin
and Cui (2009)

Javadi et al. (2017)

Niyato and Hossain (2008), Huang et al. (2015a, 2017), Bu and Yu (2014) and Larcher et al. (2004)
Wu and Kuo (2012)

Fattahi et al. (2007)

Zhu et al. (2014), Jing et al. (2016) and Chen et al. (2010a, 2010b)

Saki et al. (2014a)

He and Mao (2014)

Luo et al. (2010, 2011), Guo et al. (2014), Wu et al. (2015) and Chen et al. (2011a)

Kushwaha et al. (2008), Ali et al. (2018a) and Chaoub et al. (2011b)

He et al. (2016a, 2016b), Hu et al. (2009, 2010), Hu and Mao (2010, 2012), Xu et al. (2014), Donglin
and Shiwen (2012), Huang et al. (2016), Mao and Hu (2010) and Bradai et al. (2014)

Saki and Shikh-Bahaei (2015) and Saki et al. (2014b, 2015)

Bocus et al. (2011)

Guan and He (2012), Akter and Natarajan (2011), Huang et al. (2016), Xu et al. (2014), Yao et al. (2014,
2015), He et al. (2016a), Hou et al. (2013), Piran et al. (2015b), Zhou et al. (2010) and Bo and Yifeng
(2011)

Iwamura et al. (2010) and Vijayarani and Nithyanandan (2017)

Kumar and Jagannatham (2012)

Goudarzi (2013) and Ali et al. (2013)

Ge et al. (2010), Zhang and Feng (2010) and Vishram et al. (2014)

Guan and He (2012), Geetha and Sagayee (2016), Bradai et al. (2014), Shiang and van der Schaar
(2008), Jiang (2016), Chuang et al. (2015), Yao et al. (2015), Yao et al. (2014), Li et al. (2013), Wu et al.
(2014), Jiang et al. (2012), Vijayarani and Nithyanandan (2017), Liang et al. (2011), Piran et al. (2014b)
and Jalil et al. (2014)

applications in mesh networks. The authors transformed a video rout-
ing problem in a dynamic CRN into a decision theory problem. Then
a terminal analysis backward induction was utilized to generate the
routing algorithm that enhanced the PSNR of the received video. The
quality of a multi-hop path was determined by the quality of the chan-
nels along this path, and the quality of the channels was inferred using
prior distribution and posterior distribution. The posterior distributed
was built in order to provide data on the channels duration uncertainty
and ultimately the suitability of an adjacent SU according to the differ-
ent priorities that have been given to the video frames. Then, the best
neighboring nodes are selected by analyzing the tree with a backward
induction, but removing the candidates that may decrease the transmit-
ter’s gain. The performance of the proposed approaches was measured
by the quality of delivered video measured in terms of PSNR.

e Markov Model

There are various families of random processes including Gaussian
processes, Poisson processes, Autoregressive models, Moving-average
models, Markov chains and others. A Markov chain is a random pro-
cess, that processes a given form of dependence among current and past
samples. A stochastic model that is used to model a randomly varying
systems is known as Markov model. There are many Markov models in
literature, including the first order Markov model, the N-order Markov
model, the Hidden Markov model (HMM), the partially observable
Markov decision processes (POMDP), and the variable length Markov
model (VMM), etc. The first order Markov model has a simple structure,
which involves a low estimation of parameters as well as low complex-
ity. However, only the state of the current moment is considered in
this model, and the forecast capability is limited as well. The N-order
Markov model has a higher prediction accuracy, but by increasing the

18

number of orders the complexity increases dramatically. The HMM is
flexible in terms of structure, and it is a good choice for simulating
a complex sequence of data sources but has a high complexity. The
POMDP model is applicable for the systems with a limited condition
and can get the optimal solution if it is implemented exactly. However,
the exact calculation value is suitable for small scale problems only.
Finally, VMM can support a wide range of applications that have a vari-
able predictive order, but a suitable bound limit is not readily available
(Wu and Li, 2017).

A hidden Markov process (HMP) is defined as a discrete-time finite
state homogeneous Markov chain that is observed via a discrete time
memoryless invariant channel. In a mathematical model, an HMP is
expressed as the pair of H,,O, on the probability space of (A,B, z),
where H, and O, are the hidden state and observation sequences, respec-
tively. A is the state transition matrix, B is the output symbol probability
matrix, and z is the initial state probability vector. The mathematical
model that is used to form HMP is known as HMM. In the context of
CRNs that use HMM, the behavior of PUs can be modeled. If the PU is
active in a given channel then it is marked as busy/ON, but if there is
no primary signal over the channel then it is recognized as idle/OFF,
which is shown by Fig. 9 (Jalil et al., 2017).

Suppose S(t) = {s1(6),So(t),...,Sy(t)} is a set of channel states,
and the state of channel n, CH,, at time t is s,(t) depending on some
corresponding state transitions probabilities, where the state space is
S = {0,1}. Then o,(t) is the corresponding result of spectrum sens-
ing function. An HMM model is presented in Jalil et al. (2017) by its
parameters A = (A,B, z), where

e A=[aylyxy V1 <ij<N is the state transition matrix that defines
transitioning probability from one state to another or to the same
6T

Table 11

Machine Learning-based Resource Allocation Techniques for QoS/QoE provisioning in MCRNs.

Technique

Bayesian Model

Clustering Algorithm

Genetic Algorithm

Simulated Annealing
Markov Model Birth-Death
Process

Discrete Time
POMDP

Independent
Processes
ON/OFF

HMM

Finite-state
SMDP

Research

Huang et al. (2014,
2020) and Piran et al.
(2015b)

Bradai et al. (2015)
Abbas et al. (2015)
Shah et al. (2014)

de Baynast et al. (2008)
Farsi and Jafarian (2013)
Huang et al. (2012)
Huang et al. (2011b)

Javadi et al. (2017)
Bicen et al. (2012)

Bhattacharya et al.
(2011)

Wu et al. (2015)
Si et al. (2016)

Fa et al. (2015)
Mansour et al. (2009)
Sudipta and Saha (2017)
Dastpak et al. (2012)
Jalil et al. (2017)

Chen et al. (2011b)

He et al. (2016c) and
Hongli et al. (2015)

QoS Metrics

Throughput

QoE Metrics

PSNR __ Distortion

Vv
Vv
Vv
Vv Vv
Vv Vv
Vv
Vv
Vv Vv
Vv
Vv Vv
Vv Vv
Vv
Vv
Vv Vv
Vv

Video
Coding

MOS
SVC
SVC
SVC
SVC

JV

v SVC

JV
SVC

Network-context

Distributed Multi-user

Vv

Vv

Vv

Vv Vv
Vv
Vv
Vv

Access Mode

TDMA

TDMA

TDMA/CSMA

FDMA

TDMA

FDMA

TDMA

TDMA

TDMA

Application

Video
surveillance
Video
Surveillance
WSNs

Real-time
Services in
WSNs

Video streaming
in ICNs
Real-time Video
Streaming

Cellular
networks

Vehicular
networks

‘TD ya UDAd TPL NW

6SZZOI (OZOZ) ZZI suonvsyddy szamdwoy pup y4omjaNy fo Jousnor
M. Jalil Piran et al.

>
is?
v

p(s2/z3)

 

 

p(s2/22)

OODO@O®

 

 

v2
a) A

e|

 

 

5

SOOUOMILIS

se

€0 ee)
2

(S)

SOB

P(s2)

Ou

4
>
?

P(s2)

OE

Oo
-
WD)

©

Fig. 8. Decision tree schematic view.

20

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

 

Fig. 9. HMM diagram for the hidden and observed ON and OFF states.

state, as shown in Fig. 9.

e B=[b,(k)]nxm is the output symbol probability matrix that com-
putes the probability of providing various output symbols while
being in a specific state.

e xz = {P(s, = h,)} is the initial state probability vector.

The parameters, such as the probabilities of state transition, obser-
vation symbol emission, and initial state distributions, are calculated
according to them as the following.

Me

aij =P (h(t) = Sj | h,(t _ 1) = Si) > ai = 1, (17)
j=l
M
bj(k) = P (0, = § | s,(t) = 5;), )) Bk) = 1, (18)
k=1
N
j=l

where 0 < aj; Lj € N; $= {s1,--- Sy }3 b(k) < 1,k € M;
a = {21,%o,...,HnN}; 2; > O. To estimate the state of the next slot,
it is required to determine the model parameter of every channel based
on the observation set. Therefore, an HMM predictor can be utilized to
forecast the state of o,,,, according to the experienced M observations.
First, to calculate the parameters and train the HMM model for the
future channel state prediction, the observation sequence was utilized
as the training sequence. The observation set regarding the channel sta-
tus was required to be determined to achieve the past sensing results.
In doing so, the Baum-Welch algorithm (BWA) (Welch, 2003) was used.
BWA is a derived form of the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm
to estimate the HMM parameters. Using BWA, the HMM model param-
eters, A = (A,B, z) are defined as follows:

I= (9,7), (20)

A= fe ‘| (21)
Qjgo Ay
b b

B= | 00 | (22)
big yy

SUs are allowed to utilize a channel only when it is found as idle. Indeed,
this method is only applicable to the centralized networks, where there
is a central entity to provide such information about PU activity. The
probability that a given channel is busy is given as:

pk Ao Ao eA tao)t,

_ _ 2
To Ay +A A, Ao (23)
M. Jalil Piran et al.

while the probability that a given channel is free to use can be calcu-
lated as:

— 40 pay Ho)t.

A
pk = 1
A, +o

0 Ay + Ag

(24)

There are many approaches based on the Markov model in the liter-
ature for multimedia transmission over CRNs. In Mansour et al. (2009),
channel allocation to SUs was conducted according to PUs’ activity,
channel quality and latency of each user. The authors formulated the
SUs rate adaptation problem as a constrained general-sum switching
control dynamic Markovian game, which the PUs’ activities and the
block fading channel were modeled as a finite state Markov chain. They
used an encoded video using scalable video coding (SVC) and distor-
tion rate in order to characterize the multimedia content changes as
a Markov process. Finally, they demonstrated the efficiency of their
switching control Markovian game formulation in terms of a system
performance improvement. The performance of the proposed approach
was compared to a myopic scheme in terms of PSNR.

The authors in Dastpak et al. (2012) introduced a channel usage
model based on a two-state Markov model and estimated the future
busy and idle duration of the channels based on the previous monitor-
ing results. The main objective was to optimize the bit rate of the ELs
according to the available channel condition. The authors solved the
resource allocation optimization problem by employing dynamic pro-
gramming at three different levels: frame, group of pictures (GOP), and
scene.

The authors in Bhattacharya et al. (2011) proposed a channel alloca-
tion scheme that offered some non-contiguous white spaces that totally
satisfied the requirements of a multimedia signal in terms of bandwidth.
They modeled the system after Markov’s birth-and-death process, in
which channel allocation and deallocation were modeled as the birth
and death processes respectively. One of the advantages of the proposed
technique is that it does not need that the WS be provided in contigu-
ous manner mandatory. To do that first, it is necessary to discover the
available WS whose total width is sufficient to carry multimedia signal.
By having the set of available WS, then the authors subdivided the bits
from the original signal in the time domain, form sub-packets with these
subsets of bits and send these sub-packets through the set of the discov-
ered WS. The performance of the proposed approach was compared by
the first-fit and best-fit allocation techniques in terms of the average
number of attempts that is required to obtain the needed channels.

In Wu et al. (2015), a dynamic resource allocation approach for
multimedia transmission over CRNs was proposed, and the discrete
time Markov model was used to calculate the probability of PU occu-
pying a licensed channel by constructing the state transition. Also, an
S-ALOHA-based approach was considered in order to derive the closed-
form result of delay and throughput-based utility function with the goal
of maximizing the utility function value over each channel. The pro-
posed scheme showed a good performance in terms of utility function
values of SUs over primary channels.

The authors in Ali and Yu (2009) proposed a jointly optimized appli-
cation layer QoS using POMDP in order to discover the best channel that
offers the lowest distortion. This approach was designed under a com-
mon (hierarchical access) channel sharing model, in which the SUs were
required to sense the spectrum bands and compete with the other SUs
to access the available channel while there was no active PU in the tar-
get channel. The author discussed a dynamic programming framework
in order to acquire the optimal intra-refreshing policy. The advantages
of the suggested algorithm can be stated in terms of low complexity as
well as considering both multimedia features and channel selection for
CRNs.

In Jiang et al. (2012), a QoE-driven resource management scheme
for SUs was considered, in which the historical QoE data under a dif-
ferent primary channel was collected by the SUs and delivered to a
BS. The BS allocated the available channels to the SUs based on their
QoE requirements and established a priority service queue. A Markov

21

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

model combining an ON/OFF model of primary channels and the ser-
vice queuing model was derived to assess the system performance. The
proposed scheme incorporated the perception delivered video quality
into a channel allocation design for CRNs. The issue considered by this
work is the case, in which several SUs are served by a single CR-BS. In
this way, the throughput of the network is not fully utilized because of
limited spectrum reuse efficiency.

Markov model as a solution for cross-layer optimization also was
examined in the literature. Yu et al. (2011a) considered an integrated
design approach in order to jointly optimize the multimedia intra-
refreshing rate at the application layer along with access strategy, as
well as spectrum sensing for multimedia transmission over CRNs. The
authors formulated the QoS optimization problem as a POMDP and pre-
sented a low complexity dynamic programming framework in order to
obtain the optimal policy. Based on the channel condition, traffic sta-
tus, and buffer state, a Markov decision process and the optimal deci-
sion policy was considered in Chen et al. (2013) for real-time multime-
dia transmission over CRNs in order to maximize the throughput. The
authors solved the problem using linear programming and concluded
that the optimal scheduling policy can be predetermined as saved in the
system for scheduling traffic in real-time. The results of the suggested
scheme have been shown in terms of QoS improvement and throughput
optimization.

In Chen et al. (2011b), the channel and residual energy state transi-
tions were modeled by the finite-state Markov chain. The optimal policy
was acquired by a primal-dual priority-index heuristic. The proposed
scheme was shown as a tool to reduce the computational and imple-
mentation complexity. The authors in He et al. (2016c) and Hongli
et al. (2015) designed a semi-Markov decision process (SMDP)-based
call admission and resource allocation approaches in order to improve
QoS and QoE of video services in HetNets. In this scenario, the SVC-
encoded video content is transmitted in a flexible mode based on the
available radio resource. The authors showed that their scenario is able
to improve both QoS and user experience in terms of PSNR and smooth
playback.

e Multi-Agent Learning

Multi-agent systems are decentralized systems composed of some
independent members, known as agents, which cooperate or compete
to yield a specific goal. The model-based learning is the most important
and useful technique of multi-agent learning. In this mode, the learning
process starts with some models of the opponent’s strategy and then
computes and plays the best response, and then it observes the oppo-
nent’s play and the model of strategy and returns to the previous step.
The best and well-known instance of this scheme is fictitious play. The
opponent is supposed to play a stationary strategy, and the observed
frequencies are taken to model the opponent’s mixed strategy.

A multi-agent learning model is applicable to CRNs, where SUs are
the agents and the ultimate goal of the competition is to occupy the best
available primary channel. This model has been studied by Shiang and
Van der Schaar (2009), Shiang and Van Der Schaar (2008a), Shoham
et al. (2006) and Qin and Cui (2009) for multimedia transmission over
CRNs.

For QoS provisioning and in order to maximize the number of multi-
media users, the authors in Shiang and Van der Schaar (2009) and Shi-
ang and Van Der Schaar (2008a) presented a distributed and multi-user
resource allocation scheme, which lets SUs exchange data and explic-
itly considers the latency and cost of exchanging the network data over
multi-hop CRNs. Furthermore, based on the fact that in CRNs, node
competition is due to the mutual interference of neighboring SUs using
the same frequency channel, the authors adopted a multi-agent learning
approach, which is adaptive fictitious play, to present the behavior of
neighbor SUs based on the data exchange among the network nodes and
allocate the resource accordingly. Active fictitious play techniques were
studied to assess the propensity for a specific neighbor to take a given
action, e.g. handover to a known channel. As a result, it was proved by
M. Jalil Piran et al.

the authors that the decentralized channel allocation technique using
adaptive fictitious play significantly improved the performance of mul-
timedia transmission over multi-hop CRNs.

Certainly, SUs are not allowed to reuse a channel that has already
been captured by another SU. If an SU adopts a frequency channel, the
interference range is exchanged with the other SUs with the specified
information scope. In this case, if the channel is already occupied, the
interference range is exchanged to the other SUs too. In multi-agent
learning, fictitious play (Shoham et al., 2006), rational learning, and
reinforcement learning were employed as model-based and model-free
schemes respectively. The proposed method operates well with avail-
able channels, and it was proved that the presented cross-layer scheme
can obtain better reconfiguration quality and application layer perfor-
mance under interference range.

In Qin and Cui (2009), a multi-user resource management approach
was proposed called the real-time decentralized multi-agent learning
algorithm, which dynamically utilizes accessible channels while uti-
lizing available interference information to achieve the learning effi-
ciency. The system diagram of the proposed scheme is presented in
Fig. 10. The proposed algorithm was successful to reduce PLR, delay,
and the cost of information exchange. In the proposed method, first, a
packet is chosen from the application schedule at the node n according
to the impact factor of the packet, and an action is performed for that
packet. Second, all the nodes carrying the optimization continuously
adapt to the network variations.

e Bayesian Model

A Bayesian model, as a statistical model, uses a probability to show
all uncertainty about both input and output, within a model. Bayesian
optimization is a feasible technique for those optimizing objective func-
tions that need a long time to assess. In order to quickly estimate
the queuing latency in multimedia transmission over CRNs without
exchanging additional data regarding the content of interest and net-
work states among SUs, Huang et al. (2014) proposed employing a
Dirichlet-prior-based fully Bayesian model in every SU to update its
statistical distribution on other SUs’ non-contiguous-OFDM subcarrier
selection strategies automatically. The Bayesian model was used to
learn the ever-changing wireless channels and prevent the overhead
for distributed data exchange in cooperative scheduling. This scheme
is useful in mobile CRNs where the traffic statistics normally face dra-
matic changes from time to time because of the frequent routing topol-
ogy changes.

The authors in Huang et al. (2020) adopted an online learning
method based on Dirichlet process in order to forecast the channel
usage according to the feedback (ACK/NACK). Such kind of feedbacks
are useful to prevent frequency signal exchange among the users. The
forecast results help to compute the delay performance especially when
a user sends a certain volume of content packets on a given channel.
Then, for QoS provisioning, a dynamic spectrum access scheme has
been proposed. Using a Bayesian non-parametric interference model,
the authors in Piran et al. (2015b) classified short and longtime sec-
ondary transmission opportunities based on PU’s activity for multime-
dia transmission over CRNs. The proposed system allocated an appro-
priate channel for multimedia traffic based on the channel quality and
the exact requirement of the traffic. The authors proved the acceptable
performance of the considered scenario via simulation and experimen-
tal results.

e Clustering Algorithm

Shah et al. (2014) proposed a spectrum-aware and energy efficient
clustering-based resource allocation scheme for multimedia transmis-
sion over CR-based WSNSs. In this scheme, clustering was used to sup-
port QoS and energy-efficient routing by limiting the attending SUs
in the route establishment. In order to minimize the distortion and
improve the QoE, the number of the clusters was determined optimally.
Furthermore, the non-contiguous available spectrum holes were clus-

22

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

tered and scheduled to provide continuous transmission opportunities
for SUs. The routing algorithm used clustering with hybrid MAC by
combining CSMA and TDMA. TDMA was used for intracluster transmis-
sion while CSMA is used for inter-cluster routing. It was concluded that
a cross-layer design of MAC and PHY layers provided efficient multime-
dia communication over CRNs.

In order to improve both spectral and energy efficiency in the case
of real-time video transmission in wireless sensor networks (WSNs),
Bradai et al. (2015) proposed a solution clustering algorithm. In the
proposed algorithm, the SUs were clustered based on their geographi-
cal location, and the status of the currently available channel and the
forecast channel for the secondary usage. A cluster head was selected
for each cluster according to the energy utilization of all clusters. After
that, a channel allocation was presented based on PU activity forecasts
to reduce channel switching and consequently improve the QoE. The
proposed solution showed a better performance in terms of delay, PSNR
and PLR, as well as EE compared to SEARCH and SCEEM. It avoids fre-
quency handoff, however, the minimum QoS was not guaranteed.

e Genetic Algorithm

Typically, a genetic algorithm generates solutions to optimization
problems using techniques similar to natural evolution, such as inher-
itance, mutation, selection, and crossover. A genetic algorithm (GA),
as an optimizer algorithm, has been used in the literature for multime-
dia transmission over CRNs in Huang et al. (2011b, 2012), Farsi and
Jafarian (2013) and de Baynast et al. (2008).

Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been proved as an opti-
mal solution to achieve highly reliable and efficient data communica-
tion in a noisy wireless channel for traffic monitoring services. In this
context, the authors in Huang et al. (2011b, 2012) jointly designed
an object-based SVC and LDPC coding for resisting channel errors
and reducing the latency for multimedia transmission over CRNs. The
authors adopted a GA as an optimization technique for video qual-
ity under constraint. In the proposed scenario, the GA was utilized to
search for the minimum value of the fitness function, and the proposed
optimization problem was to find the maximum value. The authors
proved that under certain a channel condition using the appropriate
code length, channel selection and marketization could help to maxi-
mize the spectrum utilization and multimedia transmission quality. The
proposed approach is able to provide services with better PSNR and
lower BER and outage probability. However, the scheme is only able to
measure the quality of the delivered video in two modes, i.e. subjective
and objective when the requirements are known.

An adaptive modulation and coding scheme for CRNs based on
OFDM was presented in Farsi and Jafarian (2013), which altered its
modulation and coding rate to enhance the QoE for video services in
CRNs. Since the adaptive modulation and coding schemes are natu-
rally a non-linear function, the artificial neural network was utilized to
model the function. Then, a GA and particle swarm optimization were
applied to optimize the function representing the relationship between
inputs and outputs of the artificial neural network in order to achieve
a more accurate model. They proved that the proposed adaptive mod-
ulation and coding scheme presented a perfect and powerful decision
to select optimum modulation and coding rate. They also provided a
higher quality for delivered videos as well as a GA is more a powerful
optimizer algorithm compared to a particle swarm optimizer.

The authors in de Baynast et al. (2008) invoked GA to iteratively
found the optimum parameters based on a network acknowledgment
signal only regardless of information regarding the network status as
channel state estimation. The authors claimed that GA-based cognitive
methods were able to provide true benefits in the context of wireless
communications. The authors showed that the GA is superior to the
related techniques like water-filling algorithm for power and channel
allocation. Sanna and Murroni (2010) utilized genetic programming
to perform direct search of the optimal solution and proved that the
wideband sensing problem can be solved consistently with the problem
M. Jalil Piran et al.

Neighbor Node

  

Real -time
Service

   

Priority / Pac

Dele in

OPON SULIOGUSION

Transmission Rate/
Packet Loss Rate
MAC Layer

UOISSIWUSUPIT JoyOe

Application Layer

ket length /

  
 
 
 
 

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

  
     
   

Available
Resources

    
 
  

Information
I Bp.Coit-Nelexe
Interface

Local
Information

Estimated Delay

 

 
 

Spectrum
Opportunity
PHY Layer

  

 

 

Fig. 10. Cross-layer design framework for real-time services over CRNs.

formulation and without limitations.
e Simulated Annealing (SA)

SA is a probabilistic technique used to estimate the approximate
value of the global optimum of a function. Specifically, SA is a meta-
heuristic to approximate global optimization in a large search space
for an optimization problem. The authors in Javadi et al. (2017) pro-
posed an unequal resource allocation approach based on the priority
of the coded bits in image quality for a JPEG 2000 image transmis-
sion in CRNs. The bits with more priority were protected using sub-
channels with better quality. Then, the likelihood of significant bits
being received correctly was increased. The authors presented an opti-
mal solution by minimizing the image distortion without violating the
interference to the PUs. The simulation results were provided in terms
of PSNR and BER.

4.2.2.2. Game theory. Game theory is one of the main branches of
operational research. It predicts the behavioral possibility and certainty
of the game members and analyses each member’s optimal selection
strategy. It is applicable to a wide range of applications according to
the interaction between rational and intelligent members in these type
of games. Based on dynamic spectrum sharing in CRNs, SUs scram-
ble to utilize the licensed spectrum bands in an opportunistic manner.
Applying game theory in CRNs to realize reuse of non-renewable pri-
mary channels is a feasible and efficient technique to make a balance
between the growing demands for wireless services and the issue of
spectrum scarcity.

Resource allocation based on game theory is of great significance to
provide the service reliability for SUs willing to communicate multime-
dia over CRNs. The game would be between PUs and SUs or even among
different SUs competing for primary channels. The game among SUs is
played to manage shared channels as well as the amount of bandwidth
that each SU can use (Neel et al., 2002; Niyato and Hossain, 2008). We
have listed different models of game that have been used to manage the
resource for multimedia transmission in CRNs in Table 12.

Among the game theory models applicable to resource management,
the auction model is considered as a very effective approach in order to
mitigate interference and protect the interests of PUs among the three
models (Gao et al., 2019). Auction-based spectrum allocation has drawn

23

a great deal of attention for the wider-coverage application scenario.
Normally, three issues are taken into consideration while designing a
spectrum auction algorithm, which includes economic characteristics,
spectrum reuse, and spectrum heterogeneity (Zheng et al., 2016).

The authors in Larcher et al. (2004) proved that the spectrum
agility provides better quality for multimedia transmission by utilizing
a decentralized, non-cooperative channel allocation strategy for more
efficient resource allocation. In their proposal, each SU attempts to max-
imize its utility function by occupying the best available channel. They
formulated this process as a game. The process of spectrum handoff
then has been represented as the Nash equilibrium at a time when no
SU wished to do a spectrum handoff. This is due to the fact that any
change in the operating point near the equilibrium degrades the user
spectrum utilization. They proved that the Nash Equilibrium is reached
in a sequential manner because each SU takes the best decision one
after another. However, in practice the competition paradigm has not
been implemented for cooperative multimedia communication.

The authors in Niyato and Hossain (2008) formulated the problem
of spectrum sharing between multiple SUs and one PU as an oligopoly
market competition and employed a non-cooperative Cournot game in
order to discover the holes for secondary usage. In general, the dynamic
game model was utilized to model uncertainty of the observed situa-
tions adopted by the other players. A PU and several SUs have interac-
tions to discover the best available channel for their transmission. The
issue is that a complete image of the strategies cannot be obtained via
interaction with a single PU. The authors showed that the Nash equilib-
rium cannot be considered as an efficient approach whereas the profit
as all SUs is not maximized. However, it has been stated that the Nash
equilibrium offers a fair solution in case of channel sharing.

In Sun et al. (2006), the second-price auction mechanism was used
to allow SUs to bid for the holes based on the fade state of channels,
in which the discovered band is offered to the SUs based on a payment
amount of the second highest bid. The main idea of the paper is to
allocate time slots with a second-price auction scheme when the budget
is used as bid and the Nash Equilibria are found in the case of general
communication channel state distribution but it has been stated that it
is usually not unique except when the channel distribution is uniform
over [0,1].
M. Jalil Piran et al.

Table 12

Game theory-based resource allocation techniques for QoS/QoE provisioning in MCRNs.

Application

Network-context

QoE Metrics Video

QoS Metrics

Research

Game Model

Coding

Multi-user

Centralized

PSNR

PLR

Delay

EE

SE

Throughput CP

Streaming
Services

SVC

Wu and Kuo
(2012)

Strategic-form Game

Real-time
Services

Jing et al.
(2016)

Auction Game

Huang et al.

Stackelberg Nash equilibrium Game

(2015a, 2017)

Social Welfare

Real-time
Services

Zhu et al. (2014)
Bu and Yu
(2014)

2D-Auction Game

3-stage Stackelberg Game

Social Welfare

SVC

Chen et al.

Auction Game

(2010a, 2010b)

Fattahi et al.
(2007)

Mechanism-from Game

Niyato and

Nash equilibrium Game

Hossain (2008)

Larcher et al.
(2004)

24

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

In Wang et al. (2008), the problem of resource allocation for dis-
tributed CRNs is that it is modeled as a non-cooperative game, in which
an SU-pair is considered as one player. The author proposed a price-
based iterative protocol in which the SUs negotiate their optimal trans-
mission energy and bands. The simulation results presented in the paper
show that the proposed price-based iterative water-filling algorithm
improved the Nash equilibrium and has better output comparing the
iterative water-filling algorithm. Furthermore, it was emphasized that
the pricing approaches such as linear pricing function with a fixed pric-
ing factor for all SUs is able to improve the equilibrium by pushing
it closer Pareton optimal frontier. But the issue is that such techniques
need global data and are therefore not feasible for distributed networks.
Whereas, Niyato and Hossain (2008), Sun et al. (2006) and Wang et al.
(2008) were proposed for non-real-time data traffic and did not con-
sider requirements of multimedia streaming. Therefore, they are not
directly applicable for multimedia transmission over CRNs.

The authors in Jing et al. (2016) proposed a dynamic channel alloca-
tion strategy based on QoS-layering and auction theory, in which they
classified the SUs based on the characteristics of the data stream, and
allocate the optimal channels for each user. In this strategy, the QoS
requirements, such as bandwidth, delay, and packet loss rate, of differ-
ent users are matched with the available offers from different channels
to judge their similarity by norm approximation and get the optimal
channel to access. This was performed by building an auction model
and system utility function based on Vickrey—Clarke-Groves (VCG)
sealed auction theory. As a result, the proposed auction theory based
on QoS layering is able to choose an optimal channel for each SU and
hence improve channel utilization.

In Chen et al. (2010a), a cross-layer approach was presented that
jointly designed the multimedia coding and channel selection. The
authors formulated the spectrum allocation issue as an auction game,
which each user competes for the resources by paying for the con-
troller at each time slot. They proposed three distributively auction-
based channel allocation techniques: channel allocation by single object
pay-as-bid ascending clock auction (ACA-S), channel allocation by tra-
ditional ascending clock auction (ACA-T), and channel allocation by
alternative ascending clock auction (ACA-A). The authors claimed that
their proposed scenarios allow PUs and SUs to switch among differ-
ent quality levels without interruption since the uniquely scalable and
delay-sensitive characteristics of the video content and the resulting
impact on QoE are explicitly considered in the utility function.

Fattahi et al. (2007) proposed a dynamic resource allocation
scheme, in which the users can adjust their strategy according to their
networks status. In this technique, each SU plays a resource allocation
game. A network moderator is considered to coordinate the game. A
mechanism-based resource management scheme computes the amount
of transmission time to be assigned to different users on various avail-
able channels, the known overall system metrics are optimized. By
doing so, the PU first collects all the private data from the SUs and then
calculates the resource allocated to the SUs by solving the optimization
problem that maximizes the aggregate utility. Moreover, the PU calcu-
lates the transfer from every SU based on the amount of net utility loss
it causes other users. All SUs need to report their private information,
which in turn is against the right of privacy. Also, the computational
complexity of this approach is very high, whereas the PUs must solve
many optimization problems equal to the number of active SUs. How-
ever, Fattahi et al. (2007) and Chen et al. (2010a) only considered the
latency factor for multimedia streaming, but no other factors such as
frame priorities.

To overcome the above-stated issues, in Wu and Kuo (2012), a cross-
layer resource management scheme was proposed that considered both
the latency and transmission priorities of a multi-layer encoded content;
the authors applied game theory in order to achieve optimal resource
allocation. The proposed scheme adapts the context of multimedia con-
tent and variations of the available channels by specifying the weight-
ing of the source-destination pair that is specified by the deadlines of
M. Jalil Piran et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

the encoded video sequences, the queuing delay, the and channel states.
Then, the available spectrum bands are allocated to source-destination
pairs based on their weightings and game theory. The authors in Chen
et al. (2010b) formulated the problem of spectrum allocation as an Auc-
tion game and proposed distributively auction-based spectrum alloca-
tion scheme using Alternative Ascending Clock Auction and claimed
that the proposed scenario is a cheat-proof and can enforce the selfish
SUs to report their real requirements at every clock.

Application

WSN

VANETs

Smart Grid

Video Streaming
Video Streaming
Cellular Networks
Cellular Networks
WSN

Multi-user

4.2.2.3. Cross-layer resource optimization. In cross-layer approaches,
against conventional layer-wise resource management methods, inter-
action between different layers is required to be exploited. Such kind
of interactions will improve EE, SE as well as QoE (Pham and Hwang,
2017). For high-quality real-time multimedia services over CRNs, coop-
eration between the application layer and the lower layers is important
in order to maximize the cut-to-end performance. A concise procedure
of cross-layer design framework for real-time services over CRNs has
been shown in Fig. 10. Generally, some adaptive schemes are used at
the lower layers in order to enhance the rate of the links according
to the network fluctuations. For information about the link, the MAC
chooses one point of the capacity area by allocating time periods, codes,
or spectrum bands of the shared spectrum. According to the transmis-
sion rate and PLR, the MAC layer works cooperatively with the upper
layers to specify the set of the flows that provide the minimum possible
congestion. The packet scheduling is done at the application layer (Qin
and Cui, 2009).

In this context, cross-layer optimization approaches are required in
order to guarantee QoS and QoE in MCRNs. However, system opti-
mization implies several challenges, which include the facts that all
the transitivity must be aware of the current network condition and
also the optimization process must support a dynamic QoS management
approach based on the available resources. We classified and compared
the research that has been conducted about optimization for QoS/QoE
provisioning in case of MCRNS, as showed in Table 14.

In fact, maximizing throughput does not necessarily always benefit
QoS at the application layer for video streaming as an instance of mul-
timedia transmission over CRNs. The reason is that CR-based services
would have strictly lowered QoS than the other applications, which are
operating with fixed and dedicated spectrum bands. Therefore, if QoS
of the application layer is not considered carefully in CRNs, the per-
ceived reduction in QoS associated with CR may impede the success of
the CR technologies. However, in CRNs with multimedia applications,
the optimal strategy for channel selection, access decision, sensor oper-
ating point, and intra-refreshing rate are needed to be determined to
minimize application layer distortion due to instability of the network.
Therefore, in Yu et al. (2011b) as an extension of Ali and Yu (2009)
and Ali et al. (2014b), an integrated framework with the aim of jointly
optimizing the application layer QoS for multimedia transmission over
CRNs was proposed. Based on the sensing information and the channel
status, SUs can adapt intra-refreshing rate at the application layer in
addition to the parameters of other layers.

Multi-channel

Channel Access

Underlay
Overlay
Overlay
Overlay
Overlay
Overlay
Overlay
Overlay
Overlay
Overlay
Overlay
Overlay
Overlay
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid

Network-context
Distributed

H.264/MPEG-

Video
Coding
SVC
SVC
SVC
SVC
SVC

SVC

QoE Metrics
B PLR BER HO PSNR MOS
v
v
v
v

Delay DP

SE
J
J
J

QoS Metrics
Throughput CP

e Closed-form Expression

J
J
J
J
J
J
J

Considering the users’ quality-rate model of the multimedia bit-
stream, Saki et al. (2014a) proposed a quality-aware, cross-layer
resource (subcarrier and power) allocation algorithm in the context of
OFDMA-based CRNs for multimedia transmission in order to decrease
the impact of SU transmission on PUs under imperfect channel knowl-
edge. The authors formulated a probabilistic constrained optimization
problem to restrict the probability of interference imposed on the PUs
by the SUs exceeding a predetermined threshold. The authors claimed
that their simulation results showed an improvement of about 1.3 dB in
PSNR compared to the conventional algorithms. However, the proposed
scenario depends on current traffic arrivals, and the prediction, which
was based in future arrivals, was not considered.

Vijayarani and Nithyanandan (2017)

Shiang and van der Schaar (2008)
Liang et al. (2011)

Jiang (2016)
Shiang and Van Der Schaar (2008b)

Guan and He (2012)
Geetha and Sagayee (2016)
Bradai et al. (2014)
Chuang et al. (2015)

Yao et al. (2014)

Yao et al. (2015)

Li et al. (2013)
Jiang et al. (2012)
Piran et al. (2014b)

Jalil et al. (2014)
Karim et al. (2012)

Wu et al. (2014)

Priority-based Resource Allocation Techniques for QoS/QoE provisioning.
Research

Table 13

25
9G

Table 14
Cross-layer Optimization Techniques for QoS/QoE provisioning.
Optimization Solution Research QoS Metrics QoE Metrics Video Network-context Application
Coding
Throughput CP SE EE Delay PLR BER PSNR Distortion MOS Distributed Multi-channel Multi-user | Access Mode
Closed-form Expression Saki et al. (2014a) J J SVC J FDMA Video Streaming
Column He and Mao (2014) v v v TDMA Cellular
Generation-based Networks
Algorithm
Dynamic programming Wt et al. (2015) v v v
Luo et al. (2011) J J J J AVC Real-time
Services
Luo et al. (2010) J J J J AVC Real-time
Services
Efficient Sub-optimal Saki et al. (2015) J J SVC J FDMA
Algorithms
Fountain Codes Kushwaha et al. (2008) J J
Greedy Algorithm Mao and Hu (2010) J SVG,
FGS,
MGS
Xu et al. (2014) J J J J Cellular
Networks
Huang et al. (2016) J J J Vv Vv
He et al. (2016a) J J J J Cellular
Networks
He et al. (2016b) J J SVC J Social Welfare
Donglin and Shiwen J SVC, J HetNets
(2012) MGS
Hu and Mao (2010) J SVG, v
FGS,
MGS
Hu et al. (2009) v
Hu et al. (2010) J SVC, J Multi-cast
FGS
Hu and Mao (2012) J SVC Cellular and Ad
Hoc Networks
Lift-and-Project Bocus et al. (2011) J SVC FDMA
Integer Linear Ali et al. (2014a) Mesh Net
Programming
NLP Saki and Shikh-Bahaei J SVC J FDMA Video Streaming
(2015)

‘Ja UD PPL ‘IN

6SZZOI (O0Z0Z) ZZI suonvsyddy saindwoD puv y1omay fo Pousmor
M. Jalil Piran et al.

e Column Generation-based Algorithm

Column generation (CG) has been examined as an efficient tech-
nique to solve complex and large linear programs. Indeed, some of the
variables in the complex linear programs are non-basic and suppose to
have a value of zero in the optimal solution, and thus only a subset
of those variables are really needed to be taken into account in the-
ory while solving the problem. CG leverage this fact to generate only
the variables that have the potential to improve the objective func-
tion. Therefor, it is much easier to discover the variables with negative
reduced cost.

In order to support QoS for SUs in CRNs particularly for video
streaming services, He and Mao (2014) considered the problem of joint
optimization of spectrum sensing and spectrum allocation and power
allocation, which was formulated as a mixed integer non-linear pro-
gramming problem that is composed of two sub-problems. The first sub-
problem is with the optimal spectrum sensing strategy, and the second
one is for optimal channel and power allocation. A CG-based algorithm
was proposed to solve the problem in a distributed manner. The per-
formance of the proposed algorithm was proved in terms of channel
utilization, EE and PSNR.

e Dynamic Programming

Dynamic programming is an efficient solution for complex problems
by breaking it down into a set of easier sub-problems. Then each of
those sub-problems is individually solved once, and the solutions are
stored in a memory-based data structure such as arrays. The solution
obtained for the sub-problems is indexed in some predefined ways, gen-
erally based on the values of its input parameters, so as to facilitate its
lookup. In doing so, if in the future there is a sub-problem similar to
already solved problems, simply the indexed solution will be fetched.

To achieve the best user-perceived video quality for SUs of real-time
multimedia transmission over CRNs, a quality-driven cross-layer sys-
tem for joint optimization of system parameters residing in the entire
network protocol stack was proposed in Luo et al. (2011). In this frame-
work, time variations of PU activities and the channels were mod-
eled according to the encoder behavior, cognitive MAC scheduling, and
transmission. Modulation and coding were jointly optimized for SUs in
a systematic way under a distortion-delay framework for the best video
quality perceived by SUs. The issue was formulated as a MIN-MAX prob-
lem and solved using dynamic programming. Furthermore, to minimize
the issues regarding CRNs deployment, the video performance for SUs
was quantified and improved. The proposed quality-driven cross-layer
optimized system included different modules, such as a video encoder
module, a cognitive MAC module, a modulation and coding module, a
cross-layer optimization module, as well as a wireless video transmis-
sion module. The authors did not consider delay constraints at the appli-
cation layer, hope selection, and lower layers in an integrated mode,
which was then considered in Guo et al. (2014).

In order to estimate packet delay in multimedia transmission over
CRNs and optimize the QoS performance of the total system, Wu et al.
(2015) proposed a channel allocation approach based on S-ALOHA that
can be changed with a new packet transmitted over the channel. Using
S-ALOHA, the closed form result of latency and the throughput-based
utility function was derived. Luo et al. (2010) proposed a cross-layer
end-to-end system to optimize the QoE by considering packet delay
bound in CRNs for real-time video transmission. By designing the objec-
tive function and constraints based on the interactions among various
network function, the video quality for SUs is improved considerably in
terms of PSNR.

According to the spectrum sensing at the physical layer, the spec-
trum access modes at the MAC layer, and the concept of effective capac-
ity at data-link layer, the authors in Chen et al. (2011a) formulated
a relay selection problem as a partially observable Markov decision
process in order to maximize the supported arrival-rate subject for a
given statistical delay QoS constrained from a cross-layer design per-

27

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

spective. The authors derived the optimal policy through a dynamic
programming algorithm. The performance of the proposed approach
was stated in terms of the effective capacity compared to the other
related schemes.

e Fountain Codes

Rateless erasure codes or fountain codes in the domain of coding
theory are those codes that they do not exhibit a fixed code rate. The
salient feature of those codes is that a potentially limitless sequence of
encoding symbols that can be made from a certain collection of source
symbols in a way that the original source symbols can ideally be recov-
ered from any subset of the encoding symbols of size equal or larger
than the number of source symbols.

In Kushwaha et al. (2008), a single-layer approach for reliable dis-
tributed multi-layer multimedia transmission over CRNs by employing
digital fountain codes was proposed. The presence of PUs was modeled
as a Poisson Process. The technique of detecting PUs’ adopted a metric
to assess the quality of sub-carriers and further developed a scheme to
choose the required sub-carriers from the spectrum pool to maintain the
SU link. Furthermore, spectral resource optimization in the secondary
usage scenario for multimedia transmission based on the number of
available sub-carriers and PU occupancy of the sub-carriers has been
considered. Digital fountain codes are useable to compensate for the
loss incurred by PUs interference and its effect on the spectral effi-
ciency of the SUs link. It can be concluded from the observations that
there is an optimum number of sub-carriers that result in maximum SU
spectral efficiency for the same PU traffic on all sub-carriers and for
fixed parameters of the Luby Transform code. Furthermore, there exists
an optimum Luby Transform that contains overhead, which maximizes
the SU spectral efficiency for a specified set of sub-carriers. This effi-
ciency monotonically reduces with the common PU presence rate for
fixed Luby Transform code parameters and the number of sub-carriers.

RaptorQ is the first practical fountain code that was used in order
to reduce the transmission overhead. Using raptorQ enables us to
improve the system reliability in terms of the large degree of freedom
to select the transmission parameters, and help to improve channel effi-
ciency, flexibility, and linear time decoding complexity. According to
the unique features of raptorQ, the authors in Ali et al. (2018a) imple-
mented an optimized raptorQ based on the Q matrix technique for reli-
able multimedia transmission over cooperative CRNs.

e Greedy Algorithm

A greedy algorithm is an algorithmic paradigm that follows the
problem-solving heuristic of making local optimum decisions at differ-
ent levels with the aim of calculating the global optimum. The follow-
ing schemes were proposed based on the greedy algorithm paradigm
for multimedia transmission over CRNs.

In order to achieve fairness among the users while maximizing the
overall QoE based on data rate, the authors considered the problem
of multi-user multimedia transmission over the downlink of CRNs, in
which the SUs can occupy one channel at a time in He et al. (2016a).
The optimal spectrum sensing and channel allocation problems have
been tackled separately in order to make the issue tractable. In order
to allocate available channel to SUs according to their respective QoE
requirements, the authors proposed a distributed greedy poly-matching
algorithm that can find an optimal solution for the channel sensing sub-
problem and using the Hungarian method to compute an optimal solu-
tion for the channel allocation sub-problem. The quality of the delivered
service was shown in terms of MOS.

In Hu et al. (2009, 2010) and Hu and Mao (2012) a greedy algorithm
was used to solve an optimized video multicast problem that considered
some cross-layer design factors, which included SVC, video rate control,
spectrum sensing, modulation, scheduling, and PU protection. The pro-
posed algorithm exploited the inherent priority structure of a layered
video and channel qualities with proven complexity and an optimality
M. Jalil Piran et al.

gap. The authors proved the complexity and optimality bound of their
greedy algorithm in terms of PSNR.

A relay-assisted downlink multi-user multimedia streaming was
investigated in CRNs (Xu et al., 2014). The authors incorporated zero-
facing preceding to permit the transmitters collaboratively transmit
encoded (mixed) signals to all SUs in a manner that the unwanted sig-
nals would be eliminated and the desired signal could be decoded at
every SU. A stochastic programming formulation of the problem was
presented. Moreover, a problem reformulation magnificently reduced
computational complexity. Two models were developed for single and
multiple channel access, which were an optimally distributed algorithm
with proven conference and convergence speed for the single channel
access mode, and a greedy algorithm with proven performance bound
for the multi-channel access mode. In order to allocate a channel to
femto-BSs, a greedy algorithm for near-optimal solutions in the case
of interfering femto-BSs with a proved lower band was proposed in
Donglin and Shiwen (2012).

A greedy channel allocation approach in multi-user and multi-
channel CRNs was considered in Huang et al. (2016), in which maximal
spectrum utilization was obtained that supports more SUs to share the
spectrum opportunities with the least interference to PUs. The perfor-
mance of the proposed approach was demonstrated in terms of stable
channel state and the optimal packet allocation.

In Mao and Hu (2010) the problems of optimized video streaming
under two wireless network architecture e.g. IEEE 802.22 WRAN-like,
infrastructure-based CRN using a central controller and a multi-hop
CRN were investigated. Then CR video multicast over primary chan-
nels was modeled as a mixed integer NLP problem, and a sequential
fixing algorithm and a greedy algorithm was developed to solve it with
lower computational complexity and a proved optimality gap.

A greedy algorithm was presented in He et al. (2016b) to solve an
initialization problem and a pricing problem in strong polynomial time
in order to achieve an optimal solution to reduce time complexity. In
the proposed greedy algorithm, for the initialization and pricing prob-
lems of each SU, the decision variables related to the combinations of a
channel and power level that have the highest utilities among all possi-
ble combinations and still satisfy the constraints, while the other deci-
sion variables were considered as zero. A feasible and optimal solution
was guaranteed with this method.

The authors in Hu and Mao (2010) studied the problem of stream-
ing several scalable videos in a multi-hop CRNs. The users were divided
into two groups, PUs that receive video directly from a BS, and SUs
that receive video from a PU in a multi-hop fashion. They solved the
formulated mixed-integer nonlinear problem (MINLP) problem of the
channel scheduling using a greedy algorithm, which always selects the
channel with the lowest loss rate at each link when setting up tunnels
along a path and produced the optimal overall success probability. In
the case of routing, dual decomposition was applied, and a distributed
algorithm was developed as well. The quality of delivered video was
shown in terms of PSNR with mitigating interference to the PUs. The
authors in Guan et al. (2011) investigated the problem of joint resource
allocation and formulated it as a MINLP. They solved the problem using
an algorithm based on a combination of the branch and bound frame-
work and convex relaxation techniques.

e Lift-and-Project Approach

The lift-and-project approach uses two forms namely disjunctive
normal form and conjunctive normal form to find inequalities that are
valid for the 0/1-program but are violated at the optimal solution to
the LP-relaxation. Hence, adding the inequalities to the LP-relaxation,
tighten the formulation and thereby strengthens the lower bounds in a
Branch and Bound framework.

Transmission of a fine-grained scalability (FGS) video over OFDMA-
based CRNs with the aim of the allocation of a subcarrier, bit and power
allocation in order to provide high-quality video services was studied
in Bocus et al. (2011). Normally, FGS is adopted in CRNs to provide a

28

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

more channel-adaptive video source but with lower coding efficiency.
With the objectives of optimizing the total delivered multimedia qual-
ity, achieving proportional fairness among multicast users and to keep
the interference to PUs below a predetermined threshold, the authors
proposed a sequential fixing algorithm and a greedy algorithm to over-
come the problem of CR video multicast over several channels that have
been modeled as mixed integer nonlinear programming. The proposed
scheme improved resource allocation, and the users’ quality-rate model
of the video bitstream is ignored.

e Non-Linear Programming (NLP)

NLP is widely used as a solution for optimization problems where
some constraints of the objective function are non-linear. In Saki and
Shikh-Bahaei (2015) and Saki et al. (2014b), a cross-layer resource
management scheme was presented in the context of OFDMA-based
CRNs for video services. The authors considered video quality and
channel-awareness to increase the efficiency of channel and power allo-
cation based on the quality of a video for SUs and the interference
threshold to protect PUs. A probabilistic approach was proposed to mit-
igate the total interference to the PU based on the imperfect SUs to PUs
channel information. It was shown that the use of distribution approx-
imation can offer an exact forecast of the real probabilistic constraints
for a wide range of practical error variance and number of subcarriers.

The authors in Saki et al. (2015), based on user satisfaction and
delivered video quality, devised a 3D scalable video transmission in
CRNs. The authors developed an efficient suboptimal algorithm to find
a solution for the probabilistic constrained mixed discrete-continuous
NLP problem. The proposed scheme adopts a new probabilistic method
to mitigate the imposed interference by SUs to PUs. Simulation results
showed that the proposed quality-aware approach can achieve up to
a 1.3 dB improvement in PSNR per user over the conventional non-
quality-aware approaches.

4.2.2.4. Miscellaneous models. We investigate some other models that
have been proposed for QoS/QoE provisioning in MCRNs as following.

e Multi-channel Model

In order to improve the spectrum utilization, an SU with multiple
interfaces is able to access multiple spectrum bands in an opportunistic
manner in CRNs (Bocus et al., 2012). A secondary opportunistic access
pattern to the shared licensed bands exacerbates the time-varying fea-
ture of the free channels. This is considered as a severe technical issue to
perfectly match multimedia content with the channel resources, which
increases PLR and reduce QoE (Ali et al., 2018b). Therefore, the avail-
able channels change dramatically and the reliability of the multiple
accessed CR bands are also time-varying. Thereby, guaranteeing QoE
for multimedia streaming services involves great challenges in multi-
channel CRNs. To overcome these issues, several approaches have been
proposed in the literature.

The authors in Zhou et al. (2010) proposed a fully distributed
resource management approach for multimedia streaming over multi-
channel, multi-radio, and multi-hop network, with the objectives of
minimizing video distortion, achieving optimal throughput, and main-
taining a fair resource allocation scenario. They addressed the fairness
problem to maintain a balance between the selfish local motivation and
global performance. The problem was formulated as a convex optimiza-
tion and has been solved by joint optimization of channel allocation,
rate allocation and routing using MIN-MAX fairness. The proposed tech-
nique is a promising candidate solution for WSNs and LTE operating in
multi-channel and multi-radio modes. However, they considered a fixed
set of known channels and not completely DSA.

The authors in Guan and He (2012) and Bo and Yifeng (2011) inves-
tigated the resource allocation issue for multi-layered multimedia trans-
mission over multi-channel CRNs. The authors encoded the multimedia
content into several layers. Each layer was delivered to the client over
M. Jalil Piran et al.

a different channel. They jointly optimized the source rate, the trans-
mission rate, and the transmission power at each session in different
channels in order to guarantee QoS to all video sessions. The proposed
algorithm was proved to achieve high PSNR and better reliability while
maintaining a minimum PLR.

In Yao et al. (2014), a quality-driven and hierarchical-matching
approach were proposed in order to adapt the scalable video sequences
to the multiple time-varying and reliability-different CR channels based
on the priorities and validity of the network abstraction layer units
(NALUs) in the transmission scheduling. In this sensing-transmission
framework, the NALUs with higher priority at the group of pictures
(GOP) scope were transmitted over the channels with more quality and
reliability. The proposed scheme was shown to achieve a considerable
optimized video quality in terms of PSNR with a low PLR.

Using SVC, (Yao et al., 2015) that optimized the video streaming
from the perspective of exploiting more channel resources for oppor-
tunistic spectrum access. In the proposed scheme, based on PU activ-
ities, with the output of the channel sensing functions, and channel
sensing accuracy, the sensing time decreased, and consequently, the
transmission duration increased for SUs. Furthermore, a utility-based
scalable video transmission approach is proposed in order to improve
the expected QoE. By employing the proposed technique, the channel
bandwidth utilization is improved considerably and unnecessary chan-
nel sensing is eliminated as well. It is worth mentioning that the salient
point of the proposed technique is that it provides a general framework
for video quality prediction as well as the point that it can be applied
to other SVC standards such as SHVC.

The authors in Huang et al. (2016) focused on multi-user, multi-
channel multimedia transmission over CRNs, and analyzed the stable
channel state after allocating packets over a primary channel. Based
on the analysis of the stable channel conditions, the author proposed a
greedy packet allocation approach in a multi-user and multi-channel S-
ALOHA framework. It was shown that the proposed approach improves
spectrum utilization that supports more SUs to share the white spaces
as well as reduce the interference to the licensed users.

e Carrier Aggregation (CA)

CA is a promising technology to extend the bandwidth for high data
rate communications. The concept of CA was introduced in LTE Rel. 10
ratified by 3GPP, with backward compatibility to Rel. 8, as the aggrega-
tion of multiple component carrier with the goal of improving the total
available bandwidth and increasing the bitrate (Iwamura et al., 2010).
However, the fundamental features of CA are not new, as they have
already been implemented in HSPA-based systems, but by a different
name, and Dual Carrier HSPA to aggregate two adjacent carriers in the
uplink/downlink.

CA consists of grouping several component carriers, so the CA-
equipped users are able to use an accumulated bandwidth up to
100 MHz. CA can be implemented by different techniques. The first one
consists of a contiguous bandwidth where five contiguous 20 MHz chan-
nels are summed to yield the required bandwidth. The other approach
is non-contiguous carrier aggregation. Carrier components may be non-
contiguous over the same spectrum band or non-contiguous on different
spectrum bands in this mode. In Vijayarani and Nithyanandan (2017),
a dynamic time-slotted carrier scheduling scheme was studied with the
aim of efficient resource management and to support the QoS of mobile
multimedia traffic over a CA-based framework. In this scheme, time
slots are allocated to each component carrier according to the queue
status and based on the priority of the application, which was defined
based on the delay requirements.

e Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT)

In numerical and functional analysis, a DWT is any wavelet trans-
form for which the wavelets are discretely sampled. The salient advan-
tage of DWT compared to Fourier transforms is the temporal resolution
because it captures both frequency and location information (location

29

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

in time). According to such features of the DWT, it is applicable for
multimedia transmission over CRNs.

In Kumar and Jagannatham (2012), the problem of optimal video
transmission over CRNs was studied, which involved a multi-layer
encoded video sequence being obtained by employing the 2D DWT to
decompose the video into a hierarchical layered stream that comprised
of a BL and multiple ELs. The authors claimed that this approach sub-
sequently performed an intelligent allocation of these disparate layers
of the content to the different OFDM subcarriers followed by an opti-
mal power adaptation of the subcarriers of the SUs. In this scheme,
due to quantized feedback, optimum subcarrier resource allocation is
governed by (limited to) white Gaussian noise rather than the chan-
nel fading. However, the authors neglected channel rate adaptation
and end-user constraints. The main constraint associated with this tech-
nique is that the optimal subcarrier power allocation is limited to white
Gaussian noise and not channel fading because of quantized feedback.
Furthermore, two important factors, e.g. channel rate adaptation SU’s
bandwidth are not taken into account.

e Fuzzy Theory

Fuzzy logic as a soft computing technique is a form of many-valued
logic or probabilistic logic. In fuzzy theory, reasoning is transacted with
an approximate rather than having a crisp and exact value. Against the
traditional logic, which binary sets have only two-valued logic, true
(1) or false (0), fuzzy variables are mapped to truth value ranges that
include infinite numbers in a degree between 0 and 1. The concept of
fuzzy logic is extended to manage the concept of partial truth, where the
truth value falls in a range between completely true (1) and completely
false (0). Furthermore, when using linguistic variables, these degrees
are controlled by specific functions, which are known as membership
functions. According to the unique characteristics of fuzzy theory, such
as uncertainty management, it works well to tackle the issue of resource
management in CRNs.

Ali et al. (2013) proposed a fuzzy logic-based channel selection and
switching decision system in order to enhance the throughput in CRNs.
The proposed system reduced the SU channel switching rate in CRNs
by considering the impact of PUs’ activities, SUs requirements, and
the nodes’ mobility. The authors developed a fuzzy-based quality-aware
admission control (QAC) framework in Goudarzi (2013). They tried to
sustain the QoE associated with real-time multimedia in an acceptable
region while guaranteeing the interference constraints of non-real-time
PUs. The suggested approach admitted a new secondary transmitter
only if the QoE requirements of the existing SUs were satisfied and
the interference level imposed on PUs were below a given threshold.
The authors evaluated the proposed method in terms of QoE based on
the MOS and outage probability.

e Graph Theory

The core idea in graph-based resource allocation methods in CRNs
is to abstract the network topology architecture, which includes SUs,
and maintain a resource management model based on graph coloring
according to the corresponding interference and restriction conditions.
In the graph coloring mode, the vertexes represent unlicensed users.
The communication links among SUs represents the interference among
them (a vertex for a pair of SUs), and this implies that two SUs can-
not use a network or band simultaneously. Each vertex is mapped to
an optional set of colors that represent accessible channels for SUs. The
available networks sets of various vertexes are different, which are spec-
ified by the location of vertexes, the network coverage, and the type of
services. Therefore, the resource management issue of each SU is trans-
lated to the problem of coloring each vertex by this mapping relation-
ship. Furthermore, the interference status is the constraint, wherein, if
there is a link between the two neighboring vertexes, it is not possible
for them to use the same color simultaneously. The proposed graph col-
oring schemes in the literature are applicable to enhance the utility of
CRNs, which means that resource allocation to SUs is performed in such
M. Jalil Piran et al.

a way that the total throughput of the network is maximized (Ge et al.,
2010; Zhang and Feng, 2010; Vishram et al., 2014).

The authors in Vishram et al. (2014) proposed a graph coloring-
based fair resource management scheme in order to manage the issue of
self-coexistence in CRNs. The considered network is modeled by graph
using the cells, interference among the cells, and channels. Those ele-
ments are represented using nodes, edges, and colors. In the proposed
approach, multiple CRNs are allowed to operate over a known area to
assign the available spectrum holes on a non-interfering basis with a
given grade of QoS. The proposed scheme considers the SUs in a pri-
ority manner, and the channels are allocated on a demand-basis and
according to each SU’s priority with Jain’s fairness index. The priority
for different multimedia traffic is defined in descending order for voice,
video, best effort, and background traffic respectively. The proposed
approach allows several CRNs operating over a known area to assign
channels on a non-interfering basis having a given grade of QoS.

Zhang and Feng (2010) introduced the graph-coloring theory and
the MAX-MIN algorithm multiuser OFDM system for subcarrier alloca-
tion to achieve a better network performance. Based on the interfer-
ence among different SUs and spatial and temporal differences between
the accessible channels as the constraints, a rand algorithm, a greedy
algorithm, and a MAX-MIN algorithm were proposed to improve the
spectrum utilization in non-contiguous OFDM networks. The proposed
framework is a promising solution to maximize the utility of the sys-
tem by allocating appropriate channels to the SUs such that the over-
all throughput of the network is maximized accordingly. However, the
authors did not consider power allocation as an important metric for
fair spectrum allocation.

e Priority-based Algorithm

According to different QoS/QoE requirements of the diverse multi-
media applications, they have different priorities. For example, voice
applications are very sensitive to delay and packet loss. However, video
applications are loss-tolerant. Hence, they need a different type of
channel to be transmitted. We have done a comprehensive compari-
son among the priority-based techniques for multimedia transmission
over CRNs as shown in Table 13.

The authors in Jiang et al. (2012) developed a multimedia transmis-
sion model over CRNs, in which the CR-based BS allocates the acces-
sible channels to the unlicensed users according to their QoE require-
ments and establish a priority service queue. In this scheme, the lowest
priority is defined as the traffic with non-delay-sensitive video applica-
tions that can tolerate frequent channel switches. On the other side, the
traffic classes with more stringent QoE expectations fall into the high
priority classes. If an SU of type — i class arrives and more available
subcarriers exist in the network, the call will be placed at the position
of the last type — i SU. The other unlicensed users of type — jj > i)
will be moved forward. If there are no free sub-channels in the system
when the type — i SU arrives, the new SU arrival will not be admitted.

Jiang (2016) proposed a traffic model of monitoring electronic
data and monitoring multimedia video in CR-based smart grid. In this
scheme, the traffic is categorized into four types that have different pri-
ority computation formulas. Only the top-k priority monitoring SUs can
be permitted to arrive for and establish a communication link if the
number of free licensed spectrum bands is k at the time of scheduling
to enhance the delivery probability of electronic data and multimedia
data. Furthermore, the authors proposed a buffer resend approach to
store the failed information to prevent the overflowing of the buffer.
The performance proposed scheme was evaluated in terms of blocking
probability and was shown that it is able to increase the communication
successful probability for SUs while avoiding interference to PUs.

A multimedia streaming scheme that broadcasts safety and enter-
tainment contents in both fully and intermittently connected networks,
e.g. vehicular Ad Hoc networks (VANETs), under different traffic con-
ditions was proposed in Bradai et al. (2014). The contents are divided
into some groups based on their priority, such as safety contents as high

30

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

priority and non-safety as low priority. Based on the quality and reli-
ability of the channel, the best CR channels are allocated using a time
series model to cater to high priority traffic classes, which meets the
QoS requirements. The performance of the proposed scheme was com-
pared to the proposed schemes in Viriyasitavat et al. (2011), Bakhouya
et al. (2011) and IEEE 1609.4 standard and was demonstrated that in
terms of PSNR and PLR it has a better performance whereas in the pro-
posed scheme, the obstruction is less and thereby frame retransmission
is reduced as well.

Based on a priority queuing analysis and a decentralized learning
algorithm, a priority virtual queue interface that specifies the necessary
data exchanges and assesses the expected latency experienced of the
traffic with different priority was investigated in Shiang and van der
Schaar (2008). This expected latency is important for video streaming
applications, because of their delay-sensitivity nature. According to the
data exchanged, the interface measures the expected latency using a pri-
ority queuing analysis that considers the wireless channels fluctuations,
characteristics of the content, and the competing users’ behaviors in the
same frequency channel. Although the authors acquired the final form
of delay not exactly, the proposed scheme showed a considerable video
quality compared to fixed and dynamic channel allocation techniques
whereas the least interfered channel is allocated to SUs.

The authors in Yao et al. (2014) designed a priority-validity schedul-
ing principle for a scalable video at the NALU level. Using this
approach, the valid NALUs during a scheduling unit including sensing
and transmission duration, have a great priority span. Then, a source-
channel matching technique was proposed to adapt NALUs, whose pri-
ority area greatly differs, to the multiple-channel whose reliabilities
may be also greatly different. As a result, the higher important NALUs at
the global GOP scope is able to be delivered through the channels with
better quality and reliability, which explain the hierarchical matching.

A dynamic resource allocation scheme was proposed in Shiang and
Van Der Schaar (2008b) based on priority packet scheduling for mul-
tiple SUs to transmit multimedia content over different channels. The
proposed scheme cares about various requirements and latency thresh-
olds of different sources. By utilizing priority virtual queue analysis and
based on priorities of accessing the channels, different expectations of
the SUs as well as channel quality, they estimated the delay.

e Summary and Higher Level Insights

In this section, resource allocation management for MCRNs has been
surveyed in depth. Efficient resource allocation is essential in order to
improve both QoS and QoE. The proposed techniques in the literature
for dynamic resource allocation management try to improve QoS by
maximizing EE, SE, and throughput on one side and by minimizing
BER, PLR, BP, CP, DP, latency, and jitter on the other side. Moreover,
QoE improvement is another goal of the resource allocation manage-
ment techniques by reducing distortion and interruptions as well as
maximizing PSNR and QoE.

First, we discussed two management modes including centralized
and distributed. Then, we classified different proposed techniques in
the literature (as shown in Table 10) including multi-channel mode,
game theory, carrier aggregation, decision tree, discrete wavelet trans-
form, fuzzy theory, game theory, Markov model, multi-agent learn-
ing, priority-based as well as different cross-layer resource optimization
techniques. We compared all the proposed solutions in a separate table
and highlighted how their operations differ according to their design
concept.

The main challenge in most of the research work is to make a trade-
off between different QoS and QoE objectives that are in conflict by
nature. For example, maximizing EE results in prolonging the network
life-time; however, it has a negative effect on SE and throughout and
vice versa. Similarly, maximization of QoS may result in an increased
CP.
M. Jalil Piran et al.

4.3. Network fluctuation management

The ever-increasing demand for bandwidth in wireless networks
coupled with under-utilization of the spectrum bands paved the way
towards DSA. Against the traditional fixed spectrum allocation policies,
DSA allows license-exempt end-users, such as SUs, to access the licensed
spectrum bands in an opportunistic and non-interfering manner only
when they are not being used by PUs. DSA improves the spectrum uti-
lization, but introduces a severe issue known as network fluctuations
involving the number of useable resources, which could be possibly dif-
ferent at any time in each area. Network fluctuation is the nature of
wireless networks, and it is amplified in CRNs according to its funda-
mental characteristics: being opportunistic and DSA. This issue needs to
be considered in any CRNs, otherwise it will greatly affect the final QoE,
particularly for multimedia transmission. This is more salient according
to the fact of heterogeneity in the application contents, and that net-
work fluctuations in a useable channel may cause great variations in
available bandwidth and jitters between multimedia packets.

4.3.1. Solutions

In the following, we provide some efficient techniques to overcome
the issue of network fluctuation in CRNs, particularly with those that
are applicable to multimedia applications.

e SVC

Video streaming over CRNs can be realized using non-scalable video
coding such as H.264/AVC, and the scalable video coding such as
H.264/SVC. SVC was developed as an extension of H.264/AVC jointly
by the Joint Video Team (JVT) of ISO/IEC MPEG and ITU-T VCEG
(video coding experts group) in order to be the dominant and next gen-
eration of multimedia compression standards.

SVC offers a flexible traffic rate for media streaming to match the
varied transmission conditions. SVC can be done in three modes that
include spatial, temporal and SNR as shown in Fig. 11. In the temporal
mode, the number of frames is adjusted while in the spatial mode the
size is changed, and in the SNR mode, the quality is modified in order
to compress the video contents. The multimedia content is encoded in
a layered manner with a BL that provides the basic quality of a video,
and several ELs that support the refined details. The streaming of the
BL and fine granularity truncation of ELs allow an elastic traffic profile
to adapt to the transmission bandwidth fluctuations. SVC may results
in substantial SE but may cause a severe quality imbalance. This means
that the end-users with high capacity channels, such as high bandwidth,
receive high-quality video content, but it is not available for the users
with poor network conditions. In this section, we review the proposed
works that considered SVC as a solution for MCRNs and point out their
advantages and disadvantages.

In Wu and Kuo (2012), a cross-layer resource allocation scheme and
a MAC control protocol that adapts to the characteristics of multime-
dia traffic and wireless network fluctuations by adjusting the weight
of the source-destination pair, was proposed. To overcome various fac-
tors, like deadlines of SVC-encoded multimedia streams, the queuing
and channel conditions have to been taken into account. The proposed
algorithm allocates resources to source-destination pairs based on their
weight and game theory and thereby, the changes in the channel avail-
ability are compensated. The performance of the proposed scheme was
shown in terms of PSNR.

Omer et al. (2016) proposed an algorithm to determine the optimum
number of ELs to be sent under a maximum bit budget and latency
deadline. In other words, the goal of the proposed algorithm was to
obtain optimal scheduling of the video frames within the allocated
slots in order to meet their deadline and achieve maximum quality.
The free channels were assigned to unlicensed users according to their
buffer occupancies. A streaming technique was also proposed based on
the delay requirements of the delay constraint traffic, which also con-

31

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

 

15 Hz 30Hz
(a) Temporal scalability: change of frame rate

 

CIF 4CIF

 

(b) Spatial scalability: change of frame size

 

High quality

Low quality

(c) SNR scalability: change of quality

Fig. 11. Three common scalability modes in SVC: Temporal, Spatial, and SNR.

sidered the modulation level. The authors examined the efficiency of
their algorithm in terms of spectrum utilization, BER, and PSNR of the
reconstructed video with no interruptions. Moreover, it was shown that
SVC outperforms the single-layer counterparts in terms of the delivered
video quality.

In Bocus et al. (2011), a binary integer programming problem was
defined for subcarrier and bit allocation for scalable FGS encoded video
sequences based on some constraint, which included guaranteeing the
received at least one BL as well as restricting the user’s transmission at
the maximum rate of the highest EL in order to save network resources.
They solved the problem using the branch-and-bound technique and
found that the approach leads to a resource allocation that is very close
to optimal. Through simulations, the authors showed that the approach
allocates the available channels to the users in a way close to the opti-
mal solution. However, the SUs’ quality-rate model of the stream has
not been considered.

The authors in Yu et al. (2014) used SVC to encode video and trans-
mit it in a cooperative transmission manner in the relay process. The
users with the same relay content can simultaneously broadcast the con-
tent via the same communication channel. Donglin and Shiwen (2012)
investigated the problem of streaming multiple medium grain scalable
(MGS) videos in a femtocell CRN. The authors formulated a multistage
stochastic programming issue based on various design metrics across
multiple layers. A distributed framework was developed to provide opti-
mal solutions in case of non-interfering femto-BSs. The performance of
the proposed scheme has been examined and compared to the other
related works in terms of PSNR.
M. Jalil Piran et al.

e Hybrid Mode of Overlay and Underlay

Generally, spectrum access methods can be classified as: dynamic
exclusive use, and hierarchical. In dynamic exclusive use model the
users can access either based on spectrum property rights and dynamic
spectrum allocation. While in hierarchical access model the users may
access the band in underlay (ultra wide band) and overlay (opportunis-
tic spectrum access). The hierarchical access seems to be more consis-
tent radio spectrum management policies (Kumar et al., 2018).

SUs in CRNs can access the licensed and unlicensed spectrum bands
owned by the primary network providers in the mode of hierarchical
i.e., overlay or underlay (Gu et al., 2019). In the spectrum overlay
scheme, SUs are only allowed to transmit over channels owned by pri-
mary networks that are not being used by any PU. On the other hand, in
the spectrum underlay scheme, PUs and SUs could transmit data simul-
taneously over the same channel as long as the aggregated interference
generated by SUs are below an acceptable threshold.

Compared to spectrum overlay, the advantage of the spectrum
underlay mode is that the SUs can directly access the licensed spectrum
without considering PU activities. In the spectrum underlay scheme,
the transmission power and transmission rate of each SU become crit-
ically important in order to guarantee the interference to the primary
network below a specified threshold. However, achieving high-quality
video streaming over spectrum underlay is challenging. First, SUs need
to carefully select their transmission power and transmission rate to
protect the PUs. Second, SUs suffer from the interference from both
PUs and SU, which may corrupt the video packets. Accordingly, achiev-
ing high-quality video streaming over underlay spectrum, the underlay
mode is characterized by low bitrate and low power. Encoding the lay-
ers with lower bitrate is an attractive solution when there is not enough
good quality channels.

The overlay mode for SUs is stated in terms of BER performance
(Chakravarthy et al., 2009):

pol _—

BER —_ ? (25)

 

while in the underlay mode, CR transmission power spectral density is
restricted under a predefined interference threshold:

  

UL _
PRER =Q

 
 

(26)

2 Deer Mk ED + No
Nf

where Yea M, is the total number of sub-channels occupied by PUs,
N; is the number of non-overlap frequency sub-channels over the entire
bandwidth, EP and E, are the bit energy of the PU and SU respectively,
Np is the noise contribution, and K is the total number of PUs. The
packet error rate is calculated as 1 — (1 — P(e))Packetsize,

SUs not only can operative in overlay and underlay modes, but they
can choose to select a hybrid mode of both underlay/overlay modes.
In the hybrid underlay/overlay mode, the SUs adaptively switches
between underlay and overlay modes based on spectrum occupancy
based on the PUs’ activity. In the other words, the SU initiate a trans-
mission in overlay mode at when there is no active PU and upon arrival
of any PU switches to underlay mode (Zheng et al., 2019). The hybrid
mode of underlay and overlay modes in CRNS has been considered by
many authors. Chakravarthy et al. (2007) and Oh and Choi (2010) pro-
posed a system where SUs are allowed to operate over licensed spec-
trum bands in both overlay and underlay models. In the overlay model,
SUs are allowed to utilize licensed spectrum bands when they are not
being used by any PU (Chakravarthy et al., 2009). In the underlay
model, SUs try to access licensed spectrum bands at a low power while
a PU is using the channel. In the underlay model, the SU spreads its

32

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

bandwidth large enough to ensure a tolerable amount of interference to
the PUs.

In Karim et al. (2012), a hybrid system (overlay/underlay) was
employed for scalable video transmission. The system tried both a BL
and an EL of an SVC in an overlay model. The BL represents the basic
or the lowest video quality, which contains important information that
must be received by the decoder. The BL is related to a low transmission
rate and subsequently low transmission power. Therefore, sending the
BL in an underlay model could be possible. In the proposed scenario,
uninterrupted multimedia services to SUs were provided by allowing
them to receive data with both the overlay and underlay modes of CR.
According to the priority and importance of the layers, the BL of an
SVC video was only transmitted during the underlay mode, and the
minimum service quality that had no interruptions was guaranteed by
the insertion of an I-frame as an error resilience method to mitigate
packet loss during transmission even in the existence of a PU. Then, to
improve the quality of the service, both BL and ELs were transmitted in
an overlay mode.

Hou et al. (2013) addressed the issue of QoS provisioning in the con-
text of multi-channel CRNs. Based on the channel heterogeneity among
different SUs and the feature of multicast transmission, the authors pro-
posed an approach for multicast services that incorporated cooperative
transmission between users into the direct transmission from secondary-
BS. They formulated the BL and ELs transmissions as channel-node
pairing and power allocation problems and designed a set of heuris-
tic algorithms. The proposed scheme protected the rights of subscribed
users and also improved the received video quality as well as could save
transmission time with or without cooperative transmission up to 30%.

Bo and Yifeng (2011) investigated the resource management prob-
lem for multimedia streaming over CRNs in an underlay mode where
SUs and PUs transmit data simultaneously in a common frequency
band. The authors formulated the resource allocation problem as an
optimization problem, which jointly optimized the source rate, the
transmission rate, and the transmission power at each secondary ses-
sion to provide a QoS guarantee to the video transmitting sessions.

Chaoub et al. (2019) to actively react to network fluctuations pro-
posed a method in which the original video undergoes a multiple
description scalable coding (MDSC). In such a way that the content
sequence was segmented into odd and even sub-streams. Then, they
used H.264/SVC to hierarchically encode the decomposed content. The
result of the encoding process was two independent descriptions that
refine each other. In the proposed system, it was assumed that the cog-
nitive BS utilizes the spectrum holes of TV spectrum using a hybrid
interweave and underlay approach at the time of lack of licensed radio
resources.

e Transmission Rate Adaptation (TRA)

In CRNs, the channel quality is affected by many factors such as
multi-path fading, location- and time-varying SINR, and PU arrivals.
Adaptive modulation and coding is one of the feasible technologies
to address time-varying characteristics of the channel in CRNs. TRA
allows utilization of the higher order modulation and coding schemes
to obtain a higher transmission rate when a channel condition is accept-
able. Adaptive transmission is often employed in combination with
advanced transmission techniques, such as multi-carrier code division
multiple access (CDMA), MIMO, and cooperative transmissions. When
scheduling user transmission in adaptive transmission schemes, the
total throughput of the network is improved by choosing the SU with
the best channel condition to transmit. However, these types of strate-
gies result in unfairness and QoS degradation, particularly for multi-
media transmission over CRNs. Therefore, it is of great importance to
design fair and efficient scheduling algorithms to support multimedia
transmission over CRNS. TRA at the link layer has been studied in Jiang
et al. (2016), Omer et al. (2016), Wu et al. (2012), Huang and Krishna-
murthy (2010), Chen et al. (2013).
M. Jalil Piran et al.

 

Media Content Power

  
 

 

 

 

Mranscoding| } Encoding Fate

01010100 Quality
waa a

a ao Best

i |) = le s
es @ | | Medium

Poor

Time

 

HTTP Server encodes video contents in different qualities.

Spectrum Hole... 4
4

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

Frequency Spectrum in use
; , :

-

  
  
 
 
  

| Timey

The user receives the segments
in different quality.

DSA in CRNs

Fig. 12. Adaptive video streaming over CRNs.

TRA is a promising and key candidate technology for efficient
resource allocation in the link layer in CRNs. A scenario of adaptive
video streaming over CRNs is depicted in Fig. 12. It employs adaptive
modulation and coding (AMC) and/or transmit power control to inter-
act with the dynamic changes in the network by adjusting the data
transmission rate, and plays a crucial role in achieving higher energy
efficiency. The QoS guarantees accommodating the channel variabil-
ity. Jiang et al. (2016) proposed a joint SVC-TRA approach for the EE
transmission of scalable video with QoS guarantee over OFDM CR. TRA
combined with SVC was utilized to mitigate the impact of network fluc-
tuations on QoS provisioning and improve transmission EE.

In order to provide seamless video streaming in CRNs with accept-
able perceptual quality, a channel allocation algorithm was proposed
in Omer et al. (2016) that assigns the available channels to the SUs for
adaptive video streaming while taking into consideration their buffer
occupancies.

e Handoff Management

In CRNs, the SUs need to switch to another available channel, i.e.
spectrum handoff (known as handover also) (Rodriguez et al., 2019).
Handoff must take place by SUs in three circumstances:

e A PU reclaims the channel that is captured by the SU,
e The quality of the current captured channel becomes poor,
e The SU physically moves to another cell.

The spectrum mobility results in a handoff delay (Lee et al., 2014b),
thus causing a service interruption in multimedia applications. Spec-
trum handoff schemes can be categorized into three types: proactive,
reactive, and hybrid. In the proactive mode (Song and Xie, 2012; Song
and Jiang, 2011; Zheng et al., 2011), the SUs know the PU’s activity
perfectly such as channel usage statistics in advance, and a sequence
of target channels are offered for secondary usage. Upon PU arrival,
the SU switches to the pre-selected channel in the list and continues its
own communication. On the other hand, in the reactive spectrum hand-
off scheme (Zhang, 2009; Giupponi and Pérez-Neira, 2008; NoroozOli-
aee et al., 2014), the target channel is selected through an on-demand
manner. When a PU with preemptive priority is observed to access the
channel occupied by an SU, the SU immediately switches to other idle
channels so that its seamless communication is guaranteed. Finally, the
hybrid spectrum handoff scheme in Jalil et al. (2017) combines reac-
tive and proactive schemes by using proactive spectrum sensing and
reactive handoff action.

Handoff management solutions need to consider several serious
issues:

e PU detection: using spectrum sensing functions, an SU needs to
detect both the active PUs when they want to capture a free channel

33

and PUs’ arrival while they are transmitting over a licensed channel.

e Handoff decision: using prediction techniques, SUs need to predict
PUs’ arrival. As aforementioned, false-alarm and miss-detection are
two severe problems that SUs must care.

e Target channel selection: either using proactive, reactive, or hybrid
mode, the SUs need to select an appropriate channel in order to
resume their transmission and tackle handoff delay as short as pos-
sible.

Enabling the spectrum handoff for multimedia applications in CRNs
is challenging due to multiple interruptions from PUs, contentions
among SUs, and heterogeneous QoE requirements. There are many
schemes that have been proposed to alleviate the issue of spectrum
handoff for multimedia streaming over CRNS (Jalil et al., 2017).

Using reinforcement learning in Wu et al. (2014) a learning-based
and QoE-driven spectrum handoff scheme is proposed to maximize the
users’ satisfaction. The authors developed a mixed preemptive and non-
preemptive resume priority M/G/1 queuing model for modeling the
spectrum usage behavior for prioritized multimedia applications.

Fa et al. (2015) proposed a spectrum handoff strategy to minimize
the latency in real-time multimedia packets over CRNs. They formu-
lated the handoff process with the combination of microscopic and
macroscopic optimization. Then, a mixed integer non-linear program-
ming scheme was proposed by the authors in order to solve the micro-
scopic optimization. On the other hand, in the macro-optimized model,
using the optimal stopping time as reward function within the POMDP
framework, the considered spectrum handoff technique was designed to
search an optimal target channel set and minimize the expected delay
of a packet in the long-term real-time video transmission.

In order to improve the performance of multimedia transmission in
CRNs, Li et al. (2013) proposed a prioritized spectrum handoff scheme
with finite-size buffer queues to store preempted SUs, which aimed
at avoiding the dropping events even though it slightly increased the
blocking probability. Through limiting the buffer size, the non-real-time
traffic can get a fair chance to utilize the available channels.

In Wang et al. (2017), a satisfaction probability-based QoE evalua-
tion model was developed for multimedia CRN taking specific metrics
handoff delay and handoff frequency into account. Then, based on this
model, the authors presented a spectrum decision technique to maxi-
mize the SUs’ expectation of MOS. The proposed approach adaptively
obtained a spectrum decision according to network fluctuations and the
SU traffic load.

Most of the research regarding QoS optimization do not consider
two important issues 1) the determined stringent needs of various multi-
media services cannot be satisfied based on the simplified QoS uniform
assumption; and 2) with the goal as the single objective optimization
of spectrum utilization or hand-off rate, multi-objective optimization
M. Jalil Piran et al.

of these two necessary objectives in CRNs have not been obtained. To
tackle the issues, in Ge et al. (2013), a two-tier cooperative spectrum
allocation (TCSA) method for SUs’ wireless multimedia transmission
over CRNs was proposed. TCSA considers SUs’ specific QoS demands as
constraint conditions for channel allocation, and they target achieving
the co-optimization of spectrum utilization and SUs’ spectrum hand-
off rate. TCSA includes two functional parts: one is a spectrum adja-
cency ranking algorithm implemented at CRN-terminals to satisfy SUs’
QoS requirements for different wireless multimedia applications, and
the other is a centralized max hyper-weight matching algorithm imple-
mented at the cognitive engines (CRN-CE) of CRNs to co-optimize spec-
trum utilization and SUs’ spectrum hand-off rate. Hence, with the coop-
eration between participated SUs and CRNs, TCSA constructed an effi-
cient spectrum allocation scenario for multimedia transmission.

e Summary and Higher Level Insights

Network fluctuation is an inevitable part of CRNs because of the
dynamic nature of wireless networks as well as the DSA feature.
Although such kind of salutations are interested in any services, they are
harmful to multimedia services and degrade QoE significantly. To over-
come the issue of network fluctuations in multimedia transmission over
CRNs, various solutions have been proposed in the literature including
SVC, hybrid mode of overlay and underlay, TRA, and handoff manage-
ment. Among them, SVC was demonstrated to be an effective solution.

4.4. Latency management

Multimedia streaming services are considered as delay-sensitive ser-
vices compared to proactive caching multimedia services, which are
known as a delay-tolerant service. Delay is the total time that is needed
to deliver a packet to the destination, which includes all the delays
induced by the intermediary nodes and channels. Average delay is the
mean value of all packet delays in milliseconds.

4.4.1. Delay sources and solutions

There are some specific features of CRNs that lead to an extra delay
in addition to the above-stated reasons. The proposed approaches for
delay minimization may be classified based on the specific target that
they have triggered.

e Spectrum Sensing and Discovering delay

The time to sense and discover the available channel in the reactive
mode (Si et al., 2016; Bradai et al., 2015).

Spectrum sensing is the most identical and crucial function of CR
that is used to efficiently detect the status of PUs. SUs are supposed to
perform spectrum sensing in the sensing slot and transmit their data
during the remaining frame duration as shown in Fig. 13. As discussed
in Section 4.1, a spectrum sensing function may be involved with two
common errors: false-alarm and miss-detection. Thereby, a spectrum
discovery operation may cause three types of delay including spectrum
sensing, false-alarm, and miss-detection (Hu et al., 2013). Total sensing
and discovering delay is calculated as:

D, = T, + [p(Ho)Pra(T;) +P (Hy) PalT,)| - (T, — Ts), (27)

where T, is the frame duration, T, is the sensing time, p(#l,)) and p(#1,)
are the prior probability of the absence and presence of a primary sig-
nal, respectively. However, by employing a perfect spectrum sensing
technique, the errors would be avoided. However, spectrum sensing
delay is inevitable in order to protect PUs from harmful interference.

e Delay because of Data Collection and Coordination

There is a certain delay associated with collecting important data
and coordinating it from different nodes in a distributed resource man-
agement scenario, where each node is assumed to do sensing functions
individually and forward the sensing information to a central entity,

34

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

Link Setup

Data Transmission

 

<+— _ Sensing Time ———»

GOP Duration

 

 

Fig. 13. GOP structure.

such as a sink or a BS, for final decisions (Chen et al., 2011a; Bicen et
al., 2012; Shiang and Van der Schaar, 2009; Shiang and van der Schaar,
2008; Shah et al., 2014).

The authors in Shiang and Van der Schaar (2009) explicitly consid-
ered the latency associated with collecting the necessary information
from different SUs in a CRN. They utilized adaptive fictitious play in
order to improve the performance of delay-sensitive service over CRNs.
Shiang and van der Schaar (2008) proposed a priority virtual queue
interface that determines the required information exchanges and eval-
uated the expected delays experienced by various priority classes for
multimedia transmission over CRNs. These expected delays are impor-
tant for multimedia users due to their delay-sensitivity nature. Based on
the exchanged data, the interface evaluates the expected delays using
priority queuing analysis that considers the wireless environment, traf-
fic characteristics, and the competing users’ behaviors in the same fre-
quency channel. Then, the authors proposed a dynamic strategy learn-
ing algorithm deployed at each user that exploits the expected delay
and dynamically adapts the channel selection strategies to maximize
the user’s utility function.

Spectrum coordination in the distributed frameworks is of vital
importance in order to maintain synchronization for both channel sens-
ing and allocation (Huang et al., 2014; Niyato and Hossain, 2008; Abbas
et al., 2015). The authors in Huang et al. (2014) tried to minimize
the delay for multimedia applications in a non-contiguous OFDM-based
CRN according to raw spectrum sensing, queue model, interference
temperature, and transmitted power using the fully Bayesian model.
The authors in Niyato and Hossain (2008) employed a static game
model to minimize spectrum sharing and delay caused by coordination
among the SUs. They showed that the number of admitted SUs can be
adjusted based on a predefined delay threshold.

e Media Access Delay

Naturally, CRNs work in an opportunistic spectrum access manner,
and thus upon arrival of a secondary call, if the current channel is busy,
the MAC frame has to wait for the next time slot. When a new slot
arrives, it has to wait again if the channel is still busy. This process is
repeated until a time slot becomes available. This process induces the
SU to wait and access delay happens.

The authors in Wu and Kuo (2012), Qin and Cui (2009), Wu et
al. (2015), Luo et al. (2011), Mihov (2012), Luo et al. (2010), Man-
sour et al. (2009), Vijayarani and Nithyanandan (2017), Chen et al.
(2013) and Mansour et al. (2009) adopted a TDMA multi-user CRN,
where at the beginning of every time slot, each user tried to access the
channel after a certain time delay and tried to minimize the delay by
restricting the input bitrate to the video BL. The authors in Luo et al.
(2010, 2011) considered the issue of real-time wireless video transmis-
sion over CRNs and designed a distortion-delay optimization problem
based on the encoder behavior, cognitive MAC scheduling, transmission
and modulation, and the coding scheme in order to achieve the best
user-perceived video quality. The problem was solved using dynamic
programming. The authors in Wu and Kuo (2012) and Shiang and van
der Schaar (2008) considered minimizing queuing delays by monitor-
ing queue length based on the channel quality and thereby assigned a
different priority to each queue accordingly.
M. Jalil Piran et al.

The authors in Vijayarani and Nithyanandan (2017) proposed a
dynamic time-slotted scheme in order to enhance the delay perfor-
mance of multimedia traffic in multi-carrier CRNs. They investigated
a scheduling algorithm to allocate time slots of each component carrier
based on the queue state information, which is based on the priority of
different multimedia traffic. A MAC scheduling protocol is designed to
satisfy the QoS requirements of traffic flows while optimizing the chan-
nel throughput. The system allowed SUs to access the spectrum holes
based on a priority that has been defined based on delay and frame loss
rate as the main QoS requirements (Chen et al., 2013).

Morcel et al. (2016) proposed a proactive channel access technique
for multimedia transmission over CRNs. In the proposed technique, the
SUs are allowed to recover from losing access to the primary channels
by reserving their unlicensed channels for a token time. This strategy
considerably decreases latency and jitter. In Qin and Cui (2009) an
algorithm is proposed to overcome the problem of real-time multimedia
streaming over CRNs, which a multi-agent learning model is used to
minimize the access delay.

e Handoff Delay

The switch operation (i.e. spectrum mobility) between different
spectrum bands introduces a given latency, because the physical
transceiver switches from a channel to another is not instantaneous
(Soltani and Mutka, 2013; Wang et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2014; Liang
et al., 2011; Jalil et al., 2017; Geetha and Sagayee, 2016; Bradai et al.,
2014; Bhattacharya et al., 2011; Ansuman et al., 2015).

In order to mitigate the handoff delay, a spectrum handoff manage-
ment scheme was introduced in Jalil et al. (2017) by allocating chan-
nels based on the user QoE expectation, minimizing the latency, pro-
viding seamless multimedia service, and improving QoE. To minimize
the handoff latency, channel usage statistical information was used to
calculate the channel condition. According to the collected information,
the BS maintains a ranking index of the available channel to facilitate
the SUs. Hence, upon arrival of a channel request from an SU, in a mini-
mum duration of time, the best available channel is allocated to the SU.
Thereby, the handoff latency is minimized as much as possible. More-
over, in order to overcome the interruptions caused by handoff delay,
the authors proposed using SVC to extract the BL, and send it during
a certain interval time before handoff occurrence that is shown during
handoff delays, providing seamless service.

The average delay to deliver frames from the sources to receivers
was investigated in Bradai et al. (2014), where the packets were trans-
mitted directly without any caching mechanism, and the delay has
been minimized significantly. The authors claimed that the proposed
method worked better compared to the store-carry-forward mecha-
nism, which has shown a very high delay in packet delivery. They
compared their proposed scheme with urban vehicular broadcast (UV-
CAST) and proved that less interference in the proposed scheme implies
less retransmission and consequently low frame delay. Moreover, the
rebroadcasting selection mechanism in the proposed scheme selects
the node neighbors that have high dissemination capacity. This met-
ric was designed in such a way to ensure wide content dissemination in
a minimum of hops and a minimum of retransmissions, which results
in reduced latency.

Two types of channel switching, namely, periodic switching and
triggered switching, were investigated in Liang et al. (2011). In peri-
odic switching, the SU can switch to a newly discovered channel at
the beginning of each channel switching interval, while in triggered
switching, the SUs is allowed to switch to another channel as soon as
the current channel is lost. Then, they developed a theoretical model
to derive the average handoff delay for each channel switching type.
Their simulation results indicate that the satisfactory average handoff
delay performance can be achieved for both burst and Poisson traf-
fic using the proposed method. In Wang et al. (2017), a satisfaction
probability-based QoE evaluation model was developed for multimedia
transmission over CRNs based on handoff delay and handoff frequency.

35

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

In this context, the authors proposed a spectrum decision scheme which
targets provisioning SUs MOS expectation. Geetha and Sagayee (2016)
tried to predict delay based on channel quality, transmission rate, and
packet error rate.

The authors in Wu et al. (2014) proposed a learning-based and QoE-
driven handoff management scheme to maximize the users’ satisfaction.
They showed that the proposed QoE-driven spectrum handoff scheme
with the mixed queuing model improves the users’ satisfaction in terms
of both delay and quality. Soltani and Mutka (2013) developed a frame-
work to analyze the issue of downlink video routing in CRNs based on
channel availability and delays that caused handoff and queuing. The
authors constructed a posterior distribution to provide information on
the links duration uncertainty, and ultimately the suitability of neigh-
bor nodes is determined by taking the priorities of video frames into
consideration. Wang et al. (2017) developed a satisfaction probabil-
ity based QoE assessment framework for multimedia transmission over
CRNs based on handoff delay and frequencies.

4.4.2. Summary and higher level insights

Multimedia services are delay-sensitive in nature. The issue is ampli-
fied in case of MCRNs due to existences of the PUs’ activity. In this con-
text, providing multimedia services with the lowest possible delay and
jitter and thereby acceptable QoE is a great challenge. In this section,
we review some of the solutions in the literature that have been pro-
posed to overcome the issue of latency in MCRNs. The source of the
end-to-end latency in CRNs can be different sections including sens-
ing and spectrum discovering, data collection and coordination, media
access, or handoff.

4.5. Energy consumption management

Information and communication technologies (ICT) commit in
global warming whereas nearly 2% of the greenhouse gas and 2 %10%
of global energy consumption are consumed by ICT (Zhou et al.,
2018b). High data-rate multimedia applications, especially in mobile
networks, can greatly increase energy consumption, which leads to an
emerging trend of addressing the “energy efficiency” aspect of mobile
networks. The quest for a better EE is mainly because of cost efficiency,
network lifetime, and the issue of global warming. Transmission power
in CRNs is usually constrained due to coexistence with other users,
particularly, PUs in the case of the underlay spectrum. It is impor-
tant that a CRN has high energy efficiency, so it can satisfy the QoS
objectives while staying within the transmit power constraint. Recently
green CRNs have become a hot topic for researchers (Jin et al., 2016;
Karmokar et al., 2014; Celik and Kamal, 2016; Chen et al., 2010c; Lian
et al., 2012; Elmachkour et al., 2014; Nobar et al., 2016; Huang et al.,
2015b; Jiang et al., 2016; Fang et al., 2017; Bradai et al., 2015; Bu and
Yu, 2014; Agarwal and De, 2016).

More specifically, the issue of energy consumption management was
considered to utilize CR in WSNs called as CRSNs (Zubair et al., 2013;
Bicen et al., 2012; Abbasi and Mirjalily, 2017; Piran et al., 2014a,
2015a; Ntshabele et al., 2019). It is because CR is a promising solution
to overcome the problem of collision and excessive contention in WSNs
that arise due to the deployment of many tiny sensor nodes connected
through radio links. In CRSNs, the nodes sense two kinds of environ-
ments, which are the physical environment and the radio environment.
In terms of physical environment sensing, the tiny nodes are deployed
to sense an area to detect the factors of interest, such as temperature,
pressure, and humidity. On the other hand, in terms of the radio envi-
ronment, the nodes need to sense and discover secondary transmission
opportunities and establish their communication.

Multimedia transmission over CRSNs is an application of interest
known as multimedia wireless sensor networks (MWSNs) (Abbasi and
Mirjalily, 2017; Abbas et al., 2015; Zubair et al., 2013; Bradai et al.,
2015; Shah et al., 2014; Li et al., 2019). The nodes in WMSNs may
be low-cost cameras and microphones that are used to store, process
M. Jalil Piran et al.

and transmit video, audio, and image data for the applications, such
as tracking and monitoring. However, there are many issues that need
to be investigated in MWSNs, such as high bandwidth demand, high
energy consumption, QoS/QoE provisioning, data processing, and com-
pressing techniques. Among them, energy consumption management is
of great importance according to the size of the nodes with very low-
capacity batteries, the sensing capability of two environments simulta-
neously, and the high volume of multimedia data for both processing
and transmission.

4.5.1. Solutions

Bradai et al. (2015) and Abbas et al. (2015) proposed an energy
efficient mechanism for multimedia streaming over CRSNs, which
ensured high-quality real-time multimedia transmission from one or
more sources to a given sink, which was under different spectrum avail-
ability conditions, while efficiently using the energy of the multime-
dia sensor nodes. In order to ensure low energy consumption, the pro-
posed scheme clusters the nodes into different clusters based on the geo-
graphic position and the actual and forecast channel availability. The
authors presented an efficient channel allocation to prevent frequent
channel switching which considers the PU activity prediction. Then, for
each cluster, a cluster head was selected in a way that preserved the
cluster energy by considering the energy utilization of all cluster mem-
bers. The authors claimed that the proposed scheme is able to increase
the video PSNR by 50% while reducing the energy consumption by 35%
compared to the other related approaches.

In Javadi et al. (2017), the overlay CR was chosen as the access
mechanism, which required flexibility in the spectrum shape of the
transmitted signals. OFDM offers these types of flexibility by filling the
spectral gaps without interfering with PUs. The authors improved the
received image quality by taking advantage of the scalable bitstream
and the unequal power allocation in two stages. The first stage opti-
mized the power allocated to the JPEG 2000 bitstream at the coding
pass level to minimize the total distortion. The second stage employed
the subcarrier allocation, adaptive modulation, and the power adjust-
ment to meet the interference requirements, which were based on the
channel conditions, and at the same time keep the same throughput for
the system.

Jiang et al. (2016) jointly considered SVC and TRA in an energy-
efficiency scheme for multimedia transmission over CRNs with QoS
guarantee. Based on estimations of the potential and the difference
between performance measurement and QoS requirement, the authors
presented an online policy iteration algorithm to optimize energy con-
sumption under QoS constraints directly. A green cognitive mobile net-
work with small cells in the smart grid environment was proposed in Bu
and Yu (2014). The nodes sense not only the radio environment but also
the smart grid environment. Based on the collected data, power alloca-
tion and interference management was performed (Bu and Yu, 2014).
The authors formulated the problem of electricity price decision, EE
power allocation, and interference management as a three-stage Stack-
elberg game, which was analyzed by a backward induction method.
Also, an iterative algorithm was proposed to obtain the Stackelberg
equilibrium for the problem.

The authors in Zubair et al. (2013) investigated video streaming in
CRNs with QoE metrics. The sensing nodes in the proposed scheme uti-
lized the concept of in-network processing for handling different pack-
ets in the networks. These in-network processing nodes minimized the
end-to-end distortion and improved the quality of the delivered video.
The proposed algorithm selectively dropped packets in the in-network
processing nodes to maximize a defined local quality index in order to
protect end-to-end QoE. In Peng et al. (2011), a Q-learning based multi-
layer cooperative mechanism was proposed to guarantee QoS require-
ments during data transmission in CRSN. According to the results of
spectrum sensing of CR nodes, a service-aware criterion was designed
to judge whether a node needs cooperative relays. Then, the reward
value of the Q Function was considered as the ratio of the residual

36

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

energy and communication energy consumption. Finally, a satisfaction
function based on transmission distance and SNR was proposed, and
based on the reward value and the sanctification, cooperate relays were
obtained.

Agarwal and De (2016) proposed a cognitive multihoming frame-
work underlaying cellular network composed of a CR-based BS and sev-
eral SUs. The issue of energy consumption caused by intermittent chan-
nel sensing was triggered as the main challenge. To alleviate the issue,
they adjusted the sensing duration and transmission rate over primary
and CRN. The authors solved the non-convex cost minimization prob-
lem using the convex-concave procedure. The proposed scheme was
examined in terms of cost, PSNR, and the number of serving users, and
demonstrated acceptable performance.

Li et al. (2019) proposed a cluster-based distributed compressed
sensing approach for QoS routing in CRSNs. The authors in order to
improve video compression efficiency, used a correlation metric for
adjacent video sensors with overlapped field of views (FoVs). Then, the
presented a QoS routing framework to transmit the compressed data
with an objective to minimize energy consumption according to delay
and reliability. It was proved that the proposed method can save the
energy while guaranteeing the QoS.

4.5.2. Summary and higher level insights

The radio access part of a typical wireless device consumes almost
70% of the expended total energy (Chen et al., 2011c). Generally, SUs
allocate more energy to the transceiver section, whereas it needs to per-
form some other extra functions, e.g., spectrum sensing and learning-
empowered adaptive transmission. Therefore, EE is of vital importance
in overall whereas it is directly related to the optimized protocols
designed for all other layers. Energy consumption management is more
important in for multimedia services in WSNs as well as mobile Things
in the Internet of Things (IoT), where the network lifetime depends
on the battery-powered sensors’ power consumption. In this section, we
have discussed some optimal EE techniques that are proposed especially
for MCRNs.

5. Open research problems

In this section, we discuss the challenges that need to be addressed
to advance the filed of multimedia transmission over CRNs. QoS/QoE
provisioning in multimedia services and the other delay-sensitive appli-
cations over CRNs such as safety applications need to consider the
inherent features of wireless networks and CR challenges jointly. These
types of latency-intolerant services demand a special kind of con-
sideration to design spectrum-aware and spectrum-adaptive transport
approaches according to their unique characteristics e.g., varying chan-
nel conditions, induced latency by channel switching and handover
functionalities.

We outline several open research problems that need to be further
investigated:

(a) Interoperability between CR and the other similar technologies:
CR has been proved to be one of the dominant candidate tech-
nologies to overcome spectrum shortage issue. However, there
is no interoperability between CR and the other candidate tech-
nologies like LTE-unlicensed. It is expected that standardization
bodies such as 3GPP, IEEE, will come forward to recommend a
good guideline in this regard.

CR and MPEG new standards: The Moving Picture Experts
Group (MPEG) is an active standardization group in the field of
audio and video compression and transmission. In recent years,
MPEG is working on two interesting projects, dynamic adap-
tive streaming over HTTP (DASH) and MPEG media transport.
DASH segments the content into smaller HTTP-based segments
and encodes the segments in different nitrates. Then, the client
is able to fetch the segments in a bitrate that fits its bandwidth.

(b)
M. Jalil Piran et al.

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

MMT, specified as ISE/IEC 23008-1, supports high efficiency
video coding (HEVC) and utilizes all-Internet protocol (AII-IP)
for broadcasting and IP network content distribution. According
to the unique characteristics of CR, it is a great enabling tech-
nology to achieve those objectives defined by MPEG in DASH
and MMT projects. However, so far there is neither research nor
standardization activities in this realm.

CR-based IoT for multimedia communication: IoT is going to bea
comprehensive chassis that will connect billions of physical, dig-
ital, and virtual devices, with sensing, computation, and com-
munication capabilities. Although plenty of research has been
conducted around IoT, the stringent requirements of multimedia
communication have not been considered significantly. There-
fore, as a subdomain of IoT, Internet of Media Things (IoMT)
needs to be investigated more comprehensively. The Media
Things (MThings) are those IoT devices that have the ability to
capture and/or present audio and/or video content. The MThings
are very limited in terms of energy, memory and computational
capabilities. On the other side, multimedia services need all the
three requirements much more than normal Things in the con-
ventional IoT. Moreover, according to severe challenges in IOMT
including SE, EE, and QoS/QoE provisioning, employing CR is an
interesting solution. Thus, the emerging CR-IoMT networks pro-
vides a novel paradigm solution for the MThings to improve the
SE. In this context, it is obvious that those scenarios and proto-
cols designed for IoT are either not applicable or would deliver
services with a very low QoE. Thereby, applying CR in IoMT
needs special protocols and techniques in order to satisfy their
end-users.

CR-based HetNets: The future generation of cellular networks,
5G and beyond, will be in the form of HetNets. In HetNets, var-
ious kind of small cells require different spectrum bands accord-
ing to their size. CR is a promising candidate technology to
make HetNets feasible. CR-based HetNets can provide better tai-
lored QoE for the multimedia applications requiring much more
bandwidth (Jalil et al., 2018). Therefore, CR-HetNets need more
research work both in terms of design and implementation.

SE and EE trade-off: Although SE and EE always conflict with
each other, both are considered as two important performance
evaluation factors in CRNs. SE [bps/Hz] indicates how effi-
cient the available network bandwidth is used while the EE
[joules/bit] indicates how efficient the power is expended. By
emerging new bandwidth-hungry multimedia applications such
as immersive media, AR/VR, the demand for higher SE will be
inevitable. Whereas maximizing either EE or SE does not imply
the resource utilization efficiency, a trade-off needs to be defined
between them while satisfying QoS and QoE requirements for
multimedia services, especially in order to design green CRNs.
Thereby, the designed protocols for MCRNs should consider a
three dimension trade-off between SE, EE, and QoS/QoE.
Receiver detection: Basically in CRNs, SUs are supposed to detect
PU according to signals that are propagated via a primary trans-
mitter. However, another efficient method to discover secondary
opportunities is the detection of primary receivers rather than
the signals come from primary senders. By doing so, more oppor-
tunities can be discovered specially for bandwidth-hungry mul-
timedia applications. To the best of our knowledge, there is a
significant limitation placed on the number of studies on the
detection of primary receivers and more researches are therefore
required in this area.

QoE evaluation model for SU in CRNs: Most of the models
that are employed for QoE estimation adopt traditional QoS-
QoE mapping, do not consider specific factors for CR conditions
including spectrum handover delay and frequency. The number
of spectrum handovers during a communication, along with the
amount of latency that they cause, greatly degrade QoE in case

37

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

of MCRNs.

Multimedia transmission over an_ ultra-wideband (UWB)
multiband-OFDM: in the case of multimedia transmission over
UWB OFDM-based CRNs, different factors must be taken into
consideration including transmit power, PU protection, and sens-
ing frequency. According to FCC regulations, the transmit power
in case of underlay communications should be less than a prede-
termined threshold, e.g. 41 dBm/MHz. In this circumstance, the
issue is how to improve service quality while maintaining the
regulation threshold.

CR-based XR: CR seems to be a feasible solution for the emerg-
ing immersive multimedia services including VR, AR, and XR.
VR stimulates one’s physical presence in real or in a world of
fantasy and enables the user to be interactive in that journey.
AR superimposes content over the real world such that the con-
tent is part of the real-world scene. XR is a combination of real
and virtual worlds where human and machines can interact with
each other using computer technology and wearable. In other
words, XR encapsulates AR, VR, mixed reality (MR), and every-
thing in between. VR becomes an occasionally used mode within
AR/XR. Such types of services need to be immersive in such a
way that the visuals, sounds, and interactions are so realistic that
they are true to life. They need to be cognitive to understand the
real world, learn personal preferences, and provide security and
privacy. And they should be always-on and connected with low
power consumption, wearable with fast wireless cloud connec-
tivity anywhere and anytime. All the mentioned technologies are
still in their infancy and thus demand a great deal of research.

(h)

(i)

6. Conclusion

CR technology is considered as a prominent technology and has been
proved efficient in handling spectrum utilization inefficiency. However,
the task of optimum spectrum management becomes more severe when
one needs to ensure the multiple aspects of QoS and QoE associated
with multimedia services, applications, and communications. On that,
we have investigated various issues with the application of CR on mul-
timedia communication in general and the problems for QoS/QoE pro-
visioning in particular. To understand the details, we have performed
a comprehensive review of the challenges and feasible approaches. In
order to grow our insights into the relevant fundamental knowledge, we
have provided in-depth and detailed explanations of MCRNs, QoS, and
QoE. Then, we have categorically discussed the challenges and surveyed
the feasible solutions for each challenge along with their strengths and
limitations for gaining some comparative comprehensions. It is clear
that QoS requirements for multimedia transmission over CRNs must
strictly be considered because of the dynamic nature of CRNs with
respect to time, location, interference, shadowing and multipath fad-
ing, the constrained resources and the multimedia transmission require-
ments. Moreover, we have shed light on several open research prob-
lems. Although the literature contains plentiful productive research into
MCRNs, in order to improve both QoS and QoE for multimedia services,
more research is needed along the lines introduced in this survey.

Declaration of competing interest
None.

References

3GPP, Mar. 2016. Digital Cellular Telecommunications System (Phase 2); Universal
Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS); LTE; Policy and Charging Control
Architecture (3GPP TS 23. 203 Version 13. 6. 0 Release 13).

5G Vision, The 5G Infrastructure Public Private Partnership: the next generation of
communication networks and services. https://5gppp.eu/, (Accessed 21 September
2019).
M. Jalil Piran et al.

5G Wireless with Cognitive Radio and IoT, SI of Taylor&Francis IETE Technical Rev,
2017..

Abbas, B., Kamal, S., Abderrazak, R., Toufik, A., Aug. 2015. Clustering in cognitive radio
for multimedia streaming over wireless sensor networks. In: Proc. IEEE International
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), Dubrovnik,
Crotia, pp. 1186-1192.

Abbasi, S., Mirjalily, G., Jul. 2017. A cluster-based geographical routing protocol for
multimedia cognitive radio sensor networks. In: Proc. IEEE 7th International
Conference on Electronics Information and Emergency Communication (ICEIEC),
Shenzhen, China, pp. 91-94.

Abdulsattar, M.A., Hussein, Z.A., Sep. 2012. Energy detection technique for spectrum
sensing in cognitive radio: a survey. Int. J. Comput. Network. Commun. 4 (5), 223.

Adigun, O., Pirmoradian, M., Politis, C., May 2015. Cognitive Radio for 5G Wireless
Networks, Fundamentals of 5G Mobile Networks, pp. 149-163.

Agarwal, S., De, S., Sep. 2016. Cognitive multihoming system for energy and cost aware
video transmission. IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Network. 2 (3), 316-329.

Agarwal, A., Dubey, S., Khan, M.A., Gangopadhyay, R., Debnath, S., Jun. 2016. Learning
based primary user activity prediction in cognitive radio networks for efficient
dynamic spectrum access. In: International Conference on Signal Processing and
Communications (SPCOM), IEEE, Bangalore, India, pp. 1-5.

Aijaz, A., Aghvami, A.H., Jan. 2015. Cognitive machine-to-machine communications for
Internet-of-Things: a protocol stack perspective. IEEE Internet Things J. 2 (2),
103-112.

Akter, L., Natarajan, B., May 2011. Distributed approach for power and rate allocation
to secondary users in cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 60 (4),
1526-1538.

Akyildiz, I.F., Lo, B.F., Balakrishnan, R., Mar. 2011. Cooperative spectrum sensing in
cognitive radio networks: a survey. Phys. Commun. 4 (1), 40-62.

Ali, S., Yu, F.R., Apr. 2009. Cross-layer QoS provisioning for multimedia transmissions in
cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC 2009), Budapest, Hungary.

Ali, A., Piran, M.J., Suh, D.Y., Oct. 2013. Fuzzy logic-based throughput enhancement for
cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. International Conference on Computer
Electronics, Seoul, Korea, pp. 257-260.

Ali, A., Ahmed, M.E., Piran, M.J., Suh, D.Y., Aug. 2014a. Resource optimization scheme
for multimedia-enabled wireless mesh networks. Sensors 14 (8), 14500-14525.

Ali, A., Ahmed, M.E., Piran, M.J., Suh, D.Y., Aug. 2014b. Resource optimization scheme
for multimedia-enabled wireless mesh networks. Sensors 14 (8), 14500-14525.

Ali, A., Kwak, K., Tran, N.H., Han, Z., Niyato, D., Zeshan, F., Gul, M.T., Suh, D.Y., Aug.
2018a. RaptorQ-based efficient multimedia transmission over cooperative cellular
cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 67 (8), 7275-7289.

Ali, A., Yaqoob, I., Ahmed, E., Imran, M., Kwak, K.S., Ahmad, A., Hussain, S.A., Ali, Z.,
Apr. 2018b. Channel clustering and QoS level identification scheme for
multi-channel cognitive radio networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 56 (4), 164-171.

Alliance, N., Aug. 2013. Service Quality Definition and Measurement.

Alvarez, F., Breitgand, D., Griffin, D., Andriani, P., Rizou, S., Zioulis, N., Moscatelli, F.,
Serrano, J., Keltsch, M., Trakadas, P., et al., Jan. 2019. An edge-to-cloud virtualized
multimedia service platform for 5G networks. IEEE Trans. Broadcast. 65 (2),
369-380.

Amjad, M., Rehmani, M.H., Mao, S., Second Quarter, 2018. Wireless multimedia
cognitive radio networks: a comprehensive survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 20
(2), 1056-1103.

Anandakumar, H., Umamaheswari, K., Oct. 2018. A bio-inspired swarm intelligence
technique for social aware cognitive radio handovers. Comput. Electr. Eng. 71,
925-937.

Ansere, J.A., Han, G., Wang, H., Choi, C., Wu, C., Aug. 2019. A reliable energy efficient
dynamic spectrum sensing for cognitive radio IoT networks. IEEE Internet Things J.
6 (4), 6748-6759.

Ansuman, B., Rabindranath, G., Koushik, S., Debasish, D., P, S.B., Dec. 2015.
Non-contiguous channel allocation for multimedia communication in cognitive
radio networks. IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Network. 1 (4), 420-434.

Anyim, I.G., Chiverton, J., Filip, M., Tawfik, A., Apr. 2018. Efficient and low complexity
optimized feature spectrum sensing with receiver offsets. In: Proc. IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), Barcelona, Spain.

Aripin, N.M., Rashid, R.A., Fisal, N., Yusof, S.S., Oct. 2009. Evaluation of required
sensing time for multimedia transmission over cognitive ultra wideband system. In:
Proc. IEEE International Conference on Ultra Modern Telecommunications
Workshops, St. Petersburg, Russia.

Arjoune, Y., Kaabouch, N., Jan. 2019. A comprehensive survey on spectrum sensing in
cognitive radio networks: recent advances, new challenges, and future research
directions. Sensors 19 (1), 126.

Askari, E., Assa, S., Oct. 2014. Full-duplex cognitive radio with packet fragmentation. In:
Proc. IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), Istanbul,
Turkey, pp. 1502-1507.

Atapattu, S., Tellambura, C., Jiang, H., Nov. 2009. Relay based cooperative spectrum
sensing in cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications
Conference (GLOBECOM), Honolulu, HI, USA.

Badoi, C.-I., Prasad, N., Croitoru, V., Prasad, R., Jul. 2010. 5G based on cognitive radio.
Wireless Pers. Commun. 57 (3), 441-464.

Baghel, V., Khan, M., Apr. 2015. Covariance based spectrum detection for cognitive
radio. Int. J. Sci. Res. (JSR) 391-394.

Bakhouya, M., Gaber, J., Lorenz, P., Nov. 2011. An adaptive approach for information
dissemination in vehicular ad hoc networks. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 34 (6),
1971-1978.

38

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

Balakrishnan, G., Jan. 2017. Cognitive Radio Cooperative Spectrum Sensing. California
State University, Long Beach, CA, USA.

Baykas, T., Kasslin, M., Cummings, M., Kang, H., Kwak, J., Paine, R., Reznik, A., Saeed,
R., Shellhammer, S.J., Feb. 2012. Developing a standard for TV white space
coexistence: technical challenges and solution approaches. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 19
(1).

Bhattacharya, A., Ghosh, R., Sinha, K., Datta, D., Sinha, B.P., Jan. 2011. Multimedia
channel allocation in cognitive radio networks using FDM-FDMA and OFDM-FDMA.
In: Proc. of 3rd International Conf. on Communication Systems and Networks
(COMSNETS), Bangalore, India, pp. 4-8.

Bicen, A.O., Gungor, V.C., Akan, O.B., Jul. 2012. Delay-sensitive and multimedia
communication in cognitive radio sensor networks. Ad Hoc Netw. 10 (5), 816-830.

Bo, G., Yifeng, H., Oct. 2011. Optimal resource allocation for video streaming over
cognitive radio networks. In: IEEE 13th International Workshop on Multimedia
Signal Processing (MMSP), Hangzhou, China.

Bocus, M.Z., Coon, J.P., Canagarajah, C.N., McGeehan, J.P., Armour, S.M., Doufexi, A.,
Feb. 2011. Resource allocation for OFDMA-based cognitive radio networks with
application to H.264 scalable video transmission. EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun.
Netw. 2011 (1), 245-254.

Bocus, M.Z., Coon, J.P., Canagarajah, C.N., Armour, S.M., Doufexi, A., McGeehan, J.P.,
Mar. 2012. Per-subcarrier antenna selection for H. 264 MGS/CGS video transmission
over cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 61 (3), 1060-1073.

Boukerche, A., Coutinho, R.W., Loureiro, A.A., Jun. 2019. Information-centric cognitive
radio networks for content distribution in smart cities. IEEE Netw. 33 (3), 146-151.

Bradai, A., Ahmed, T., Benslimane, A., May 2014. ViCoV: efficient video streaming for
cognitive radio VANET. Veh. Commun. 1 (3), 105-122.

Bradai, A., Singh, K., Rachedi, A., Ahmed, T., Jun. 2015. EMCOS: energy-efficient
mechanism for multimedia streaming over cognitive radio sensor networks.
Pervasive Mob. Comput. 22, 16-32.

Brunnstrom, K., Hands, D., Speranza, F., Webster, A., Apr. 2009. VQEG validation and
ITU standardization of objective perceptual video quality metrics [standards in a
nutshell]. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 26 (3).

Bu, S., Yu, F.R., Jun. 2014. Green cognitive mobile networks with small cells for
multimedia communications in the smart grid environment. IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol. 63 (5), 2115-2126.

Cabric, D., Tkachenko, A., Brodersen, R.W., Oct. 2006. Spectrum sensing measurements
of pilot, energy, and collaborative detection. In: Proc. IEEE Military
Communications Conference (MILCOM), Washington DC, USA.

Caso, G., Le, M.T.P., De Nardis, L., Di Benedetto, M.-G., May 2017. Non-cooperative and
cooperative spectrum sensing in 5G cognitive networks. In: Handbook of Cognitive
Radio, pp. 1-21.

Celik, A., Kamal, A.E., Sep. 2016. Green cooperative spectrum sensing and scheduling in
heterogeneous cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Network. 2
(3), 238-248.

Chakravarthy, V., Wu, Z., Shaw, A., Temple, M., Kannan, R., Garber, F., Jul. 2007. A
general overlay/underlay analytic expression representing cognitive radio
waveform. In: Proc. IEEE Waveform Diversity and Design Conference, Washington
DC, USA, pp. 69-73.

Chakravarthy, V., Li, X., Wu, Z., Temple, M.A., Garber, F., Kannan, R., Vasilakos, A.,
Dec. 2009. Novel overlay/underlay cognitive radio waveforms using SD-SMSE
framework to enhance spectrum efficiency-part I: theoretical framework and
analysis in AWGN channel. IEEE Trans. Commun. 57 (12).

Chaoub, A., Ibn-Elhaj, E., Nov. 2014. Multimedia transmission over cognitive radio
networks using decode-and-forward multi-relays and rateless coding. In: Proc. IEEE
International Conference on Communications and Networking (ComNet), Tunis,
Tunisia.

Chaoub, A., Elhaj, E.I., El Abbadi, J., Jun. 2011a. Video transmission over cognitive
radio TDMA networks under collision errors. Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl. 5-13.

Chaoub, A., Elhaj, E.I., El Abbadi, J., Apr. 2011b. Multimedia traffic transmission over
TDMA shared cognitive radio networks with poissonian primary traffic. In: Proc.
IEEE International Conference on Multimedia Computing and Systems (ICMCS),
Ouarzazate, Morocco.

Chaoub, A., Ennaoui, F.Z., Ibn-Elhaj, E., Jul. 2019. Reliable rate-adaptive video
transmission over cognitive cellular networks using multiple description scalable
coding. Telecommun. Syst. 71 (3), 321-338.

Chen, Y., Wu, Y., Wang, B., Liu, K.R., Aug. 2010a. Spectrum auction games for
multimedia streaming over cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans. Commun. 58 (8),
2381-2390.

Chen, Y., Wu, Y., Wang, B., Liu, K.R., Mar. 2010b. An auction-based framework for
multimedia streaming over cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. 35th International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Dallas, TX, USA,
pp. 2350-2353.

Chen, X., Zhao, Z., Zhang, H., Sep. 2010c. Green transmit power assignment for
cognitive radio networks by applying multi-agent Q-learning approach. In: Proc.
IEEE European Wireless Technology Conference (EuWIT), Paris, France, pp.
113-116.

Chen, D., Ji, H., Leung, V.C., Dec. 2011a. Cross-layer QoS provisioning for cooperative
transmissions over cognitive radio relay networks with imperfect spectrum sensing.
In: Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM 2011), Houston,
TX, USA.

Chen, D., Ji, H., Leung, V.C., Mar. 2011b. Energy-efficient cross-layer enhancement of
multimedia transmissions over cognitive radio relay networks. In: Proc. IEEE
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), Cancun, Mexico,
pp. 856-861.
M. Jalil Piran et al.

Chen, Y., Zhang, S., Xu, S., Li, G.Y., Jun. 2011c. Fundamental tradeoffs on green wireless
networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 49 (6), 30-37.

Chen, H., Chan, H.C., Chan, C.-K., Leung, V.C., Nov. 2013. QoS-based cross-layer
scheduling for wireless multimedia transmissions with adaptive modulation and
coding. IEEE Trans. Commun. 61 (11), 4526-4538.

Chen, Y., Su, S., Yin, H., Guo, X., Zuo, Z., Wei, J., Zhang, L., May 2019. Optimized
non-cooperative spectrum sensing algorithm in cognitive wireless sensor networks.
Sensors 19 (9), 2174-2188.

Cheng, H.T., Zhuang, W., Mar. 2011. Simple channel sensing order in cognitive radio
networks. IEEE J. Sel. Area. Commun. 29 (4), 676-688.

Chuang, Y., Gozde, O., Cenk, G.M., Senem, V., May 2015. Image and video transmission
in cognitive radio systems under sensing uncertainty. In: Proc. IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), Istanbul, Turkey, pp.
417-422.

CISCO Visual Networking Index, Feb. 2019. Global Mobile Data Traffic Forecast Update,
20172022 White Paper. Tech. rep.. CISCO.

COCORA 2018, The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio,
April 22-26, 2018, Athens, Greece.

Cognitive radio systems for efficient sharing of TV white space in European context.
http://www. ict-cogeu.eu, (Accessed 6 August 2019).

Communication Research Center Canada, Strategic plan. http://www.ficora.fi, (Accessed
21 August 2019).

Cooper, M., 2010. The Myth of Spectrum Scarcity. https://ecfsapi.fcc.gov/file/
7020396128.pdf/. (Accessed 6 August 2019).

CORAL 2016: The Fourth IEEE International Workshop on Emerging Cognitive Radio
Applications and Algorithms.

Cormio, C., Chowdhury, K.R., 2009. A survey on MAC protocols for cognitive radio
networks. Ad Hoc Netw. 7 (7), 1315-1329.

CROWNCOM 2018, 13th EAI International Conference on Cognitive Radio Oriented
Wireless Networks, Sep. 18-20, 2018, Ghent, Belgium.

Dasilva, P., Ghising, A., Patil, S., Wang, H., 2018. Implementation of cognitive radio
network testbed for multimedia communications. ICST Trans. Mobile Commun.
Appl. 4 (15), 2.

Dastpak, A., Liu, J., Hefeeda, M., Feb. 2012. Video streaming over cognitive radio
networks. In: Proc. 4th ACM Workshop on Mobile Video, New York, NY, USA, pp.
31-36.

Dayana, R., Kumar, R., May, 2016. Co-operative cyclo-stationary feature detection with
universal filtered multi-carrier spectrum sensing for cognitive radio network. In:
2016 IEEE International Conference on Recent Trends in Electronics, Information &
Communication Technology (RTEICT), IEEE, Bangalore, India, pp. 1647-1650.

de Baynast, A., Mhnen, P., Petrova, M., Mar. 2008. ARQ-based cross-layer optimization
for wireless multicarrier transmission on cognitive radio networks. Comput.
Network. 52 (4), 778-794.

Dey, S., Misra, I.S., Jun. 2018. A novel content aware channel allocation scheme for
video applications over CRN. Wireless Pers. Commun. 100 (4), 1499-1515.

Dhope, T.S., Simunic, D., May 2012. Performance analysis of covariance based detection
in cognitive radio. In: Proc. IEEE 35th International Convention on Information and
Communication Technology, Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO), Zagreb,
Crotia, pp. 737-742.

Digham, F.F., Alouini, M.-S., Simon, M.K., Jan. 2007. On the energy detection of
unknown signals over fading channels. IEEE Trans. Commun. 55 (1), 21-24.

Ding, Y., Xiao, L., Nov. 2010. Routing and spectrum allocation for video on-demand
streaming in cognitive wireless mesh networks. In: Proc. IEEE 7th International
Conference on Mobile Adhoc and Sensor Systems (MASS), San Francisco, CA, USA,
pp. 242-251.

Ding, G., Wu, Q., Zhang, L., Lin, Y., Tsiftsis, T.A., Yao, Y.-D., Jan 2018. An amateur
drone surveillance system based on the cognitive Internet of Things. IEEE Commun.
Mag. 56 (1), 29-35.

Donglin, H., Shiwen, M., Apr. 2012. On medium grain scalable video streaming over
femtocell cognitive radio networks. IEEE J. Sel. Area. Commun. 30 (3), 641-651.

El Tanab, M., Hamouda, W., 2016. Resource allocation for underlay cognitive radio
networks: a survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 19 (2), 1249-1276.

Elmachkour, M., Daha, I., Sabir, E., Kobbane, A., Ben-Othman, J., Jun. 2014. Green
opportunistic access for cognitive radio networks: a minority game approach. In:
Proc. IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), Sydney, Australia,
pp. 5372-5377.

Enserink, S., Cochran, D., Nov. 1994. A cyclostationary feature detector. In: Proc. IEEE
28th Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, Grove, CA, USA, pp.
806-810.

ETSI 300 744, 1997. Digital Video Broadcasting (Dvb): Frame Structure, Channel Coding
and Modulation for Digital Terrestrial Television (Dvb-t). ETSI, Tech. Rep. .

Fa, L., Yongkui, M., Honglin, Z., Kai, D., Feb. 2015. Evolution handoff strategy for
real-time video transmission over practical cognitive radio networks. China
Commun. 12 (2), 141-154.

Fadda, M., Murroni, M., Popescu, V., Sep. 2012a. An unlicensed indoor HDTV
multi-vision system in the DTT bands. IEEE Trans. Broadcast. 58 (3), 338-346.

Fadda, M., Murroni, M., Perra, C., Popescu, V., Feb. 2012b. TV white spaces exploitation
for multimedia signal distribution. Signal Process. Image Commun. 27 (8), 893-899.

Fairspectrum, Fairspectrum. http://www. fairspectrum.com, (Accessed 6 August 2019).

Fakhrudeen, A., Alani, O.Y., Apr. 2017. Comprehensive survey on quality of service
provisioning approaches in cognitive radio networks: Part one. Int. J. Wireless Inf.
Network 24 (4), 356-388.

Fang, H., Xu, L., Choo, K.-K.R., Mar. 2017. Stackelberg game based relay selection for
physical layer security and energy efficiency enhancement in cognitive radio
networks. Appl. Math. Comput. 296, 153-167.

39

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

Farsi, H., Jafarian, F., 2013. Video transmission using new adaptive modulation and
coding scheme in OFDM based cognitive radio. J. Inf. Syst. Telecommun. 1 (4),
239-249,

Fattahi, A.R., Fu, F., Van Der Schaar, M., Paganini, F., Apr. 2007. Mechanism-based
resource allocation for multimedia transmission over spectrum agile wireless
networks. IEEE J. Sel. Area. Commun. 25 (3).

FCC, Cognitive radio for public safety. https://www.fcc.gov/general/cognitive-radio-
public-safety, (Accessed 1 August 2019).

Federal Communications Commission, Nov. 2002. Spectrum Policy Task Force Report.
FCC 02-155...

Filin, S., Baykas, T., Harada, H., Kojima, F., Yano, H., Mar. 2016. IEEE Standard 802.19.
1 for TV white space coexistence. IEEE Commun. Mag. 54 (3), 22-26.

Flores, A.B., Guerra, R.E., Knightly, E.W., Ecclesine, P., Pandey, S., Oct. 2013. IEEE
802.11af: a standard for TV white space spectrum sharing. IEEE Commun. Mag. 51
(10), 92-100.

Ganesan, G., Li, Y., Jun. 2007. Cooperative spectrum sensing in cognitive radio, part II:
multiuser networks. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 6 (6), 2214-2222.

Gao, X., Wang, P., Niyato, D., Yang, K., An, J., Mar. 2019. Auction-based time
scheduling for backscatter-aided RF-powered cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun. 18 (3), 1684-1697.

Gardner, W.A., Apr. 1991. Exploitation of spectral redundancy in cyclostationary
signals. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 8 (2), 14-36.

Ge, Y., Sun, J., Shao, S., Yang, L., Zhu, H., Nov. 2010. An improved spectrum allocation
algorithm based on proportional fairness in cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE
12th International Conference on Communication Technology (ICCT), Beijing,
China, pp. 742-745.

Ge, Y., Chen, M., Sun, Y., Li, Z., Wang, Y., Dutkiewicz, E., Nov. 2013. QoS provisioning
wireless multimedia transmission over cognitive radio networks. Multimed. Tool.
Appl. 67 (1), 213-229.

Geetha, K., Sagayee, G.M.A., Aug. 2016. Resource management for video transmission in
cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. International Conference on Innovations in
Information, Embedded and Communication Systems (ICIIECS), vol.
978-1-4673-8207-6, India.

Ghahremani, S., Khokhar, R.H., Noor, R.M., Naebi, A., Kheyrihassankandi, J., Jul. 2012.
On QoS routing in Mobile WiMAX cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. International
Conference on Computer and Communication Engineering (ICCCE), IEEE, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia, pp. 467-471.

Ghanshala, K.K., Sharma, S., Mohan, S., Nautiyal, L., Mishra, P., Joshi, R., 2018.
Self-organizing sustainable spectrum management methodology in cognitive radio
vehicular adhoc network (cravenet) environment: a reinforcement learning
approach. In: Proc. First International Conference on Secure Cyber Computing and
Communication (ICSCCC), IEEE, Jalandhar, India, pp. 168-172.

Ghasemi, A., Sousa, E.S., Apr. 2008. Spectrum sensing in cognitive radio networks:
requirements, challenges and design trade-offs. IEEE Commun. Mag. 46 (4), 32-39.

Giupponi, L., Prez-Neira, A.I., 2008. Fuzzy-based spectrum handoff in cognitive radio
networks. In: Proc. IEEE 3rd International Conference on Cognitive Radio Oriented
Wireless Networks and Communications.

Goudarzi, P., Dec. 2013. A fuzzy admission control scheme for high quality video
delivery over underlay cognitive radio. Phys. Commun. 7, 134-144.

Grace, D., Oct. 2014. Cognitive 5G small cell systems - how can intelligence save
energy? In: Proc. Third International Workshop on Next Generation Green Wireless
Networks, Rennes, France, pp. 2029-2034.

Granelli, F., Pawelczak, P., Prasad, R.V., Subbalakshmi, K., Chandramouli, R.,
Hoffmeyer, J.A., Berger, H.S., Jan. 2010. Standardization and research in cognitive
and dynamic spectrum access networks: IEEE SCC41 efforts and other activities.
IEEE Commun. Mag. 48 (1).

Guan, B., He, Y., Jun. 2012. Optimal resource allocation for multi-layered video
streaming over multi-channel cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE 11th
International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and
Communications (TrustCom), Liverpool, UK, pp. 1525-1528.

Gu, Y., Chen, H., Zhai, C., Li, Y., Vucetic, B., 2019. Minimizing Age of information in
cognitive radio-based IoT systems: underlay or overlay? IEEE Internet Things J. 6
(6), 10273-10288.

Guan, Z., Ding, L., Melodia, T., Yuan, D., Jun. 2011. On the effect of cooperative relaying
on the performance of video streaming applications in cognitive radio networks. In:
Proc. IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), Kyoto, Japan.

Guo, H., Cui, R., Xia, T., Zhang, A., Aug. 2014. Cross-layer transmission for video
streaming in wireless relay networks. In: Proc. IEEE International Conference on
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing (IWCMC), Cyprus, pp. 684-689.

Han, L., Han, N.D., Kang, S.-S., In, H.P., Nov. 2014. Cross-layer video streaming
mechanism over cognitive radio ad hoc information centric networks. KSII Trans.
Internet Inf. Syst. 8 (11).

Haykin, S., Setoodeh, P., Feng, S., Findlay, D., Sep. 2016. Cognitive dynamic system as
the brain of complex networks. IEEE J. Sel. Area. Commun. 34 (10), 2791-2800.

He, Z., Mao, S., Oct. 2014. QoS driven multi-user video streaming in cellular CRNs: the
case of multiple channel access. In: Proc. IEEE 11th International Conference on
Mobile Ad Hoc and Sensor Systems (MASS), Philadelphia, pp. 28-36.

He, Z., Mao, S., Jiang, T., Dec. 2015. A survey of QoE-driven video streaming over
cognitive radio networks. IEEE Netw. 29 (6), 20-25.

He, Z., Mao, S., Kompella, S., Jul. 2016a. Quality of experience driven multi-user video
streaming in cellular cognitive radio networks with single channel access. IEEE
Trans. Multimed. 18 (7), 1401-1413.

He, Z., Mao, S., Komp, S., Jan. 2016b. A decomposition approach to quality-driven
multiuser video streaming in cellular cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun. 15 (1), 728-739.
M. Jalil Piran et al.

He, H., Shan, H., Huang, A., Sun, L., Oct. 2016c. Resource allocation for video streaming
in heterogeneous cognitive vehicular networks. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 65 (10),
7917-7930.

Henry, J., Szigeti, T., Apr. 2019. Diffserv to QCI Mapping. https://tools.ietf.org/id/draft-
henry-tsvwg- diffserv-to-qci-03.html. (Accessed 16 August 2019).

Heo, J., You, C. J., Lee, J. Y., Apr. 2014. Cognitive radio cooperative spectrum sensing
method and fusion center performing cognitive radio cooperative spectrum sensing,
US Patent 8, 711-720.

Hong, X., Wang, J., Wang, C.-X., Shi, J., Jul. 2014. Cognitive radio in 5G: a perspective
on energy-spectral efficiency trade-off. IEEE Commun. Mag. 52 (7), 46-53.

Hongli, H., Hangguan, S., Aiping, H., Long, S., Nov. 2015. SMDP-based resource
allocation for video streaming in cognitive vehicular networks. In: Proc. IEEE/CIC
International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC), Shenzhen, China.

Hou, F., Chen, Z., Huang, J., Li, Z., Katsaggelos, A.K., Jul. 2013. Multimedia multicast
service provisioning in cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE 9th International
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), Sardinia,
Italy, pp. 1175-1180.

How consumers judge their viewing experience. https://www.conviva.com/, (Accessed
6 June 2019).

Hu, D., Mao, S., Nov. 2010. Streaming scalable videos over multi-hop cognitive radio
networks. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 9 (11), 3501-3511.

Hu, D., Mao, S., Oct. 2012. On Scalable Video Streaming over Cognitive Radio Cellular
and Ad Hoc Networks. arXiv:1209.1032.

Hu, D., Mao, S., Reed, J.H., Apr. 2009. On video multicast in cognitive radio networks.
In: Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, Rio De Janeiro, Brazil, pp. 2222-2230.

Hu, D., Mao, S., Hou, Y.T., Reed, J.H., Apr. 2010. Scalable video multicast in cognitive
radio networks. IEEE J. Sel. Area. Commun. 28 (3).

Hu, H., Zhang, H., Yu, H., Xu, Y., Li, N., Apr. 2013. Minimum transmission delay via
spectrum sensing in cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), Shanghai, China, pp.
4101-4106.

Hu, F., Chen, B., Zhu, K., Feb. 2018. Full spectrum sharing in cognitive radio networks
toward 5G: a survey. IEEE Access 6, 15754-15776.

Huang, J.W., Krishnamurthy, V., Jan. 2010. Transmission control in cognitive radio as a
Markovian dynamic game: structural result on randomized threshold policies. IEEE
Trans. Commun. 58 (1).

Huang, X.-L., Wang, G., Hu, F., Kumar, S., Aug. 2011a. The impact of spectrum sensing
frequency and packet-loading scheme on multimedia transmission over cognitive
radio networks. IEEE Trans. Multimed. 13 (4), 748-761.

Huang, J., Zhang, Z., Wang, H., Liu, H., Dec. 2011b. Video transmission over cognitive
radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM Workshops (GC Wkshps), Houston, TX,
USA, pp. 6-11.

Huang, J., Wang, H., Bai, X., Wang, W., Liu, H., Mar. 2012. Scalable video transmission
over cognitive radio networks using LDPC code. Int. J. Perform. Eng. 8 (2).

Huang, X.-L., Wang, G., Hu, F., Kumar, S., Wu, J., Jun. 2014. Multimedia over cognitive
radio networks: towards a cross-layer scheduling under Bayesian traffic learning.
Comput. Commun. 51, 48-59.

Huang, J., Wang, H., Qian, Y., Dec. 2015a. Game user-oriented multimedia transmission
over cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM), San Diego, CA, USA.

Huang, X., Han, T., Ansari, N., Second Quarter, 2015b. On green-energy-powered
cognitive radio networks. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 17 (2), 827-842.

Huang, X.-L., Tang, X.-W., Hu, F., 2020. Dynamic spectrum access for multimedia
transmission over multi-user, multi-channel cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans.
Multimed. 22 (1), 201-214.

Huang, X.-L., Tang, X., Wu, X., Wu, J., Dec. 2016. The stable channel state analysis for
multimedia packets allocation over cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE Global
Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Washington DC, USA.

Huang, J., Wang, H., Qian, Y., Jan. 2017. Game user-oriented multimedia transmission
over cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans. Circ. Syst. Video Technol. 27 (1),
198-208.

IEEE 802.22-2011(TM) Standard for Cognitive Wireless Regional Area Networks (RAN)
for Operation in TV Bands Was Published as an Official IEEE Standard, 2011. http://
www.ieee802.org/22/. (Accessed 6 August 2019).

IEEE DySPAN Standards Committee (DySPAN-SC), http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/
dyspan/, (Accessed 5 October 2019).

IEEE International Conference on Communications, 20-24 May 2018, Kansas City, MO,
USA.

Iqbal, A., Shah, S., Amir, M., Jan. 2017. Adaptive investigating universal filtered
multi-carrier (UFMC) performance analysis in 5G cognitive radio based sensor
network (CSNs). Int. J. Eng. Works 4 (1), 5-9.

ITU, T., Nov. 1988. Recommendation E. 800: Quality of Service and Dependability
Vocabulary.

ITU, 2008. ITU-T Rec. P.910: Subjective Video Quality Assessment Methods for
Multimedia Applications.

ITU-T 1541, 2015. Network Performance Objectives for IP-Based Services.

ITU-T, 2001. 1010 End-User Multimedia QoS Categories.

Iwamura, M., Etemad, K., Fong, M.-H., Nory, R., Love, R., Aug. 2010. Carrier
aggregation framework in 3GPP LTE-advanced [WiMAX/LTE update]. IEEE
Commun. Mag. 48 (8).

Jacob, P., Sirigina, R.P., Madhukumar, A., Prasad, V.A., 2016. Cognitive radio for
aeronautical communications: a survey. IEEE Access 4, 3417-3443.

Jalil, M., Ali, A., Suh, D.Y., Jul. 2013. Orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing over
cognitive radio technology. In: Proc. General Conference of Electrical Engineering,
vol. 1, pp. 285-288Vancouver, Canada.

40

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

Jalil, M., Ali, A., Lee, D., Suh, D., Oct. 2014. Evaluation of available channel quality for
secondary usage in cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE International
Conference on Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC),
Busan, Korea, pp. 852-853.

Jalil, M., Tran, N.H., Suh, D.Y., Song, J.B., Hong, C.S., Han, Z., Jul. 2017. QoE-driven
channel allocation and handoff management for seamless multimedia in cognitive
5G cellular networks. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 66 (7), 6569-6585.

Jalil, M., Islam, S.R., Suh, D.Y., Dec. 2018. CASH: content-and network-context-aware
streaming over 5G HetNets. IEEE Access 6, 46167-46178.

Javadi, G., Hajshirmohammadi, A., Liang, J., Aug. 2017. Power and sub-channel
optimization of JPEG 2000 image transmission over OFDM-based cognitive radio
networks. Signal Process. Image Commun. 58, 157-164.

Jhajj, H.K., Garg, R., Saluja, N., 2018. Aspects of machine learning in cognitive radio
networks. In: Progress in Advanced Computing and Intelligent Engineering.
Springer, pp. 553-559.

Jia, M., Gu, X., Guo, Q., Xiang, W., Zhang, N., 2016. Broadband hybrid
satellite-terrestrial communication systems based on cognitive radio toward 5g.
IEEE Wirel. Commun. 23 (6), 96-106.

Jiang, T., Oct. 2016. Power monitoring electronic/multimedia traffic scheduling in
cognitive radio based smart grid. In: Proc. IEEE International Conference on Smart
Grid and Clean Energy Technologies (ICSGCE), Chengdu, China, pp. 80-83.

Jiang, W., Cao, H., SIG on cognitive radio for 5G. http://cn.committees.comsoc.org/,
(Accessed 21 September 2019).

Jiang, T., Wang, H., Vasilakos, A.V., Aug. 2012. QoE-driven channel allocation schemes
for multimedia transmission of priority-based secondary users over cognitive radio
networks. IEEE J. Sel. Area. Commun. 30 (7), 1215-1224.

Jiang, Q., Leung, V.C., Pourazad, M.T., Tang, H., Xi, H.-S., Jun. 2016. Energy-efficient
adaptive transmission of scalable video streaming in cognitive radio
communications. IEEE Syst. J. 10 (2), 761-772.

Jiang, H., He, H., Liu, L., Yi, Y., Jul. 2018. Q-learning for non-cooperative channel
access game of cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. International Joint Conference on
Neural Networks (IJCNN), IEEE, Rio, Brazil, pp. 1-7.

Jin, M., Guo, Q., Xi, J., Li, Y., Yu, Y., Huang, D., Nov. 2015. Spectrum sensing using
weighted covariance matrix in Rayleigh fading channels. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.
64 (11), 5137-5148.

Jin, S., Ma, X., Yue, W., Aug. 2016. Energy-saving strategy for green cognitive radio
networks with an LTE-advanced structure. J. Commun. Network. 18 (4), 610-618.

Jin, Z., Yao, K., Lee, B., Cho, J., Zhang, L., May 2019. Channel status learning for
cooperative spectrum sensing in energy-restricted cognitive radio networks. IEEE
Access 7, 64946-64954.

Jing, C., Junsheng, W., Jianhua, Z., Aug. 2016. A spectrum auction strategy for
multimedia stream in cognitive radio network. In: Proc. IEEE International
Conference on Signal Processing, Communications and Computing (ICSPCC), China.

Kakalou, I., Psannis, K.E., Krawiec, P., Badea, R., Nov. 2017. Cognitive radio network
and network service chaining toward 5G: challenges and requirements. IEEE
Commun. Mag. 55 (11), 145-151.

Kapoor, S., Rao, S., Singh, G., Jun. 2011. Opportunistic spectrum sensing by employing
matched filter in cognitive radio network. In: Proc. IEEE International Conference
on Communication Systems and Network Technologies (CSNT), Jammu, India, pp.
580-583.

Karim, H.A., Mohamad, H., Ramli, N., Sali, A., Oct. 2012. Scalable video streaming over
overlay/underlay cognitive radio network. In: Proc. IEEE International Symposium
on Communications and Information Technologies (ISCIT), Gold Coast, Australia,
pp. 668-672.

Karmokar, A., Naeem, M., Anpalagan, A., Jaseemuddin, M., Apr. 2014. Energy-efficient
power allocation using probabilistic interference model for OFDM-based green
cognitive radio networks. Energies 7 (4), 2535-2557.

Khan, A., Sun, L., Jammeh, E., Ifeachor, E., Jul. 2010. Quality of experience-driven
adaptation scheme for video applications over wireless networks. IET Commun. 4
(11), 1337-1347.

Kim, H., Shin, K.G., Sep. 2008. In-band spectrum sensing in cognitive radio networks:
energy detection or feature detection? In: Proc. ACM 14th International Conference
on Mobile Computing and Networking, ACM, San Francisco, CA, USA, pp. 14-25.

Kumar, A., Jagannatham, A.K., Jul. 2012. DWT based optimal power allocation schemes
for scalable video transmission in OFDM based cognitive radio systems. In: Proc.
Annual IEEE India Conference (INDICON), Kochi, India, pp. 24-29.

Kumar, B., Kumar Dhurandher, S., Woungang, I., 2018. A survey of overlay and underlay
paradigms in cognitive radio networks. Int. J. Commun. Syst. 31 (2), e3443.

Kushwaha, H., Xing, Y., Chandramouli, R., Heffes, H., Jan. 2008. Reliable multimedia
transmission over cognitive radio networks using fountain codes. Proc. IEEE 96 (1),
155-165.

Langtry, C., 1416 Dec. 2016. ITU-R activities on 5G. In: IEEE World Forum on the
Internet of Things Milan, Italy.

Larcher, A., Sun, H., Van Der Shaar, M., Ding, Z., et al., Nov. 2004. Decentralized
transmission strategy for delay-sensitive applications over spectrum agile network.
Packet Video 2004.

Le, L.B., Hossain, E., Dec. 2008. Resource allocation for spectrum underlay in cognitive
radio networks. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 7 (12), 5306-5315.

Lee, D.-J., Yeo, W.-Y., Mar. 2015. Channel availability analysis of spectrum handoff in
cognitive radio networks. IEEE Commun. Lett. 19 (3), 435-438.

Lee, D., Piran, M.J., Suh, D.Y., Oct. 2014a. A novel live streaming system using P2P and
statistical multiplexing. In: Proc. Information and Communication Technology
Convergence (ICTC), 2014 IEEE International Conference on, Busan, Korea, pp.
347-348.
M. Jalil Piran et al.

Lee, D., Won, D., Piran, M.J., Suh, D.Y., Jul. 2014b. Reducing handover delays for
seamless multimedia service in IEEE 802.11 networks. Electron. Lett. 50 (15),
1100-1102.

Lee, L.Z.W., Wee, K.K., Liew, T.H., Lau, S.H., Phang, K.K., Nov. 2016. An empirical study
and the road ahead of IEEE 802.16. IAENG Int. J. Comput. Sci. 43 (3).

Li, M., Jiang, T., Tong, L., Sep. 2013. Spectrum handoff scheme for prioritized
multimedia services in cognitive radio network with finite buffer. In: Proc. IEEE
11th International Conference on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing
(DASC), San Diego, CA, USA, pp. 410-415.

Li, Z., Wu, W., Liu, X., Qi, P., 2018a. Improved cooperative spectrum sensing model
based on machine learning for cognitive radio networks. IET Commun. 12 (19),
2485-2492.

Li, M., Li, O., Liu, G., Zhang, C., Nov. 2018b. Generative adversarial networks-based
semi-supervised automatic modulation recognition for cognitive radio networks.
Sensors 18 (11), 3913.

Li, L., Shen, H., Wang, T., Bai, G., Wang, L., 2019. Cluster-based distributed compressed
sensing for QoS routing in cognitive video sensor networks. In: IOP Conference
Series: Earth and Environmental Science, vol. 234. IOP Publishing, p. 12112.

Lian, X., Nikookar, H., Ligthart, L.P., Feb. 2012. Distributed beam forming with
phase-only control for green cognitive radio networks. EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun.
Netw. 2012 (1), 65.

Liang, Y.-C., 2020. Spectrum sensing theories and methods. In: Dynamic Spectrum
Management. Springer, pp. 41-85.

Liang, Z., Feng, S., Zhao, D., Shen, X.S., Jan. 2011. Delay performance analysis for
supporting real-time traffic in a cognitive radio sensor network. IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun. 10 (1), 325-335.

Liao, Y., Wang, T., Song, L., Jiao, B., May 2014. Cooperative spectrum sensing for
full-duplex cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE International Conference on
Communication Systems (ICCS), Macau, China, pp. 56-60.

Lin, Y., He, C., Dec. 2008. Subsection-average cyclostationary feature detection in
cognitive radio. In: Proc. IEEE International Conference on Neural Networks and
Signal Processing, Nanjing, China, pp. 604-608.

Ling, M.H., Yau, K.-L.A., Jan. 2019. Can reinforcement learning address security issues?
an investigation into a clustering scheme in distributed cognitive radio networks. In:
Proc. International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN), IEEE, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia, pp. 296-300.

Liu, X., Wang, Y., Liu, S., Meng, J., Apr. 2018a. Spectrum resource optimization for
NOMA-based cognitive radio in 5G communications. IEEE Access 6, 24904-24911.

Liu, M., Song, T., Hu, J., Yang, J., Gui, G., 2018b. Deep learning-inspired message
passing algorithm for efficient resource allocation in cognitive radio networks. IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol. 68 (1), 641-653.

Liu, M., Song, T., Zhang, L., Sari, H., Gui, G., Jul. 2018c. Multi-efficiency based resource
allocation for cognitive radio networks with deep learning. In: Proc. 10th Sensor
Array and Multichannel Signal Processing Workshop (SAM), IEEE, Sheffield, UK, pp.
56-59.

Luby, M., Nov. 2002. LT codes. In: Proc. IEEE Foundation of Computer Science,
Vancouver, Canada, p. 271.

Luitel, S., Moh, S., Nov. 2018. Energy-efficient medium access control protocols for
cognitive radio sensor networks: a comparative survey. Sensors 18 (11), 3781.

Luo, H., Ci, S., Wu, D., Tang, H., Mar. 2010. Cross-layer design for real-time video
transmission in cognitive wireless networks. In: IEEE Conference on Computer
Communications Workshops, San Diego, CA, USA.

Luo, H., Ci, S., Wu, D., Aug. 2011. A cross-layer design for the performance
improvement of real-time video transmission of secondary users over cognitive radio
networks. IEEE Trans. Circ. Syst. Video Technol. 21 (8), 1040-1048.

Ma, J., Zhao, G., Li, Y., Nov. 2008. Soft combination and detection for cooperative
spectrum sensing in cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 7
(11), 4502-4507.

Maia, O.B., Yehia, H.C., de Errico, L., Feb. 2015. A concise review of the quality of
experience assessment for video streaming. Comput. Commun. 57, 1-12.

Mancuso, A., Probasco, S., Patil, B., May 2013. Protocol to Access White-Space (PAWS)
Databases: Use Cases and Requirements. Tech. rep...

Mansour, H., Huang, J.W., Krishnamurthy, V., Dec. 2009. Multi-user scalable video
transmission control in cognitive radio networks as a Markovian dynamic game. In:
Proc. 48th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, Held Jointly with the 28th
Chinese Control Conference. (CDC/CCC), China, pp. 4735-4740.

Mao, S., Hu, D., Nov. 2010. Video over cognitive radio networks: when compression
meets the radios. E-Letter Multimed. Commun. Tech. Committ. 5 (6).

Marko, H., Aarne, M., Marina, E., Marja, M., Juha, K., Jaakko, O., Jaakko, S., Reijo, E.,
Roger, B., Dennis, R., Apr. 2016. Spectrum occupancy measurements: a survey and
use of interference maps. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 18 (4), 2386-2414.

Mavromoustakis, C.X., Bourdena, A., Mastorakis, G., Pallis, E., Kormentzas, G., May
2015. An energy-aware scheme for efficient spectrum utilization in a 5G mobile
cognitive radio network architecture. Telecommun. Syst. 59 (1), 63-75.

McHenry, M.A., 2007. NSF Spectrum Occupancy Measurements Project Summary.

Melagiri, V., Sudarsanan, D., 2015. A Survey on Opportunistic Channel Scheduling in
Cognitive Radio Networks with QoS Guarantees.

Mendis, G.J., Wei, J., Madanayake, A., Dec. 2016. Deep learning-based automated
modulation classification for cognitive radio. In: IEEE International Conference on
Communication Systems (ICCS), IEEE, Shenzhen, China, pp. 1-6.

Mihov, Y.Y., May 2012. Cross-layer QoS provisioning in cognitive radio networks. IEEE
Commun. Lett. 16 (5), 678-681.

Mingchuan, Y., Yuan, L., Xiaofeng, L., Wenyan, T., Sep. 2015. Cyclostationary feature
detection based spectrum sensing algorithm under complicated electromagnetic
environment in cognitive radio networks. China Commun. 12 (9), 35-44.

41

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

Mitola, J., May 1999. Cognitive radio for flexible mobile multimedia communications.
In: Proc. IEEE International Workshop on Mobile Multimedia Communications, San
Diego, CA, USA, pp. 3-10.

Mitola, J., Aug. 2000. Cognitive Radio - an Integrated Agent Architecture for Software
Defined Radio.

Moorthy, A.K., Seshadrinathan, K., Bovik, A.C., 2017. Image and video quality
assessment: perception, psychophysical models, and algorithms. Percept. Digit.
Imag.: Methods Appl. 55-81.

Morcel, R., Sarieddeen, H., Elhajj, I.H., Kayssi, A., Chehab, A., Jul. 2016. Proactive
channel allocation for multimedia applications over CSMA/CA-based CRNs. In: Proc.
IEEE 3rd International Conference on Advances in Computational Tools for
Engineering Applications (ACTEA), Lebanon, pp. 178-183.

Murugan, S., Sumithra, M., Jun. 2019. Efficient space communication and management
(SCOaM) using cognitive radio networks based on deep learning techniques:
cognitive radio in space communication. In: Cognitive Social Mining Applications in
Data Analytics and Forensics, IGI Global, pp. 65-76.

Neel, J., Buehrer, R.M., Reed, B., Gilles, R.P., Aug. 2002. Game theoretic analysis of a
network of cognitive radios. Tulsa, OK, USA. In: Proc. IEEE 45th Midwest
Symposium on Circuits and Systems (MWSCAS-2002), vol. 3, .

Nitti, M., Murroni, M., Fadda, M., Atzori, L., Dec. 2016. Exploiting social Internet of
Things features in cognitive radio. IEEE Access 4, 9204-9212.

Niyato, D., Hossain, E., Jul. 2008. Competitive spectrum sharing in cognitive radio
networks: a dynamic game approach. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 7 (7).

Nobar, S.K., Mehr, K.A., Niya, J.M., Feb. 2016. RF-powered green cognitive radio
networks: architecture and performance analysis. IEEE Commun. Lett. 20 (2),
296-299.

NoroozOliaee, M., Hamdaoui, B., Cheng, X., Znati, T., Guizani, M., Mar. 2014. Analyzing
cognitive network access efficiency under limited spectrum handoff agility. IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol. 63 (3), 1402-1407.

Ntshabele, K., Isong, B., Dladlu, N., Abu-Mahfouz, A.M., 2019. Energy consumption
challenges in clustered cognitive radio sensor networks: a review. In: 28th
International Symposium on Industrial Electronics (ISIE), IEEE, Vancouver, Canada,
pp. 1294-1299.

Ofcom, Cognitive radio. https://www.ofcom.org.uk/research-and-data/technology/
general/emerging-tech/cognitive-radio, (Accessed 21 August 2019).

Oh, J., Choi, W., Sep. 2010. A hybrid cognitive radio system: a combination of underlay
and overlay approaches. In: Proc. IEEE 72nd Vehicular Technology Conference Fall
(VTC 2010-Fall), Ottawa, Canada.

Omer, A.E., Hassan, M.S., El-Tarhuni, M., Apr. 2016. An adaptive channel assignment
approach for streaming of scalable video over cognitive radio networks. In: Proc.
IEEE UKSim-AMSS 18th International Conference on Computer Modelling and
Simulation (UKSim), Cambridge, UK, pp. 305-310.

Oner, M., Jondral, F., May 2004. Cyclostationarity based air interface recognition for
software radio systems. In: Proc. IEEE Radio and Wireless Conference, Atlanta, GA,
USA, pp. 263-266.

Patil, R.B., Kulat, K., Gandhi, A., Apr. 2018. SDR based energy detection spectrum
sensing in cognitive radio for real time video transmission. Model. Simulat. Eng.
2018.

Paul, S., Pandit, M.K., May 2018. A QoS-Enhanced Intelligent Stochastic Real-Time
Packet Scheduler for Multimedia IP Traffic, Multimedia Tools and Applications, pp.
1-24.

Peng, J., Li, J., Li, S., Li, J., Nov. 2011. Multi-relay cooperative mechanism with
Q-learning in cognitive radio multimedia sensor networks. In: Proc. IEEE 10th
International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and
Communications (TrustCom), Changsha, China, pp. 1624-1629.

Pham, Q.-V., Hwang, W.-J., Second Quarter, 2017. Network utility maximization-based
congestion control over wireless networks: a survey and potential directives. IEEE
Commun. Surv. Tutor. 19 (2), 1173-1200.

Pham, Q.-V., To, H.-L., Hwang, W.-J., Nov. 2015. A multi-timescale cross-layer approach
for wireless ad hoc networks. Comput. Network. 91, 471-482.

Piran, M. Jalil, Cho, Y., Yun, J., Ali, A., Suh, D.Y., Aug. 2014a. Cognitive radio-based
vehicular ad hoc and sensor networks. Int. J. Distributed Sens. Netw. 10 (8),
154-193.

Piran, M.J., Cho, Y., Yon, J., Ali, A., Suh, D., Jun. 2014b. Scalable video streaming over
TV white spaces using Cognitive Radio technology. In: Proc. IEEE 18th International
Symposium on Consumer Electronics (ISCE 2014), Madrid, Spain.

Piran, M. Jalil, Ali, A., Suh, D.Y., Feb. 2015a. Fuzzy-based sensor fusion for cognitive
radio-based vehicular ad hoc and sensor networks. Math. Probl Eng. 2015.

Piran, M. Jalil, Ejaz Ahmed, M., Ali, A., Song, J.B., Suh, D.Y., Aug. 2015b. Channel
allocation based on content characteristics for video transmission in
time-domain-based multichannel cognitive radio networks. Mobile Inf. Syst. 2015.

Piran, M.J., Tran, N.H., Hong, C.S., Nov. 2016. Interoprability between video frames and
available spectrum bands in cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. International
Conference on Computational Intelligence, Jeju, Korea, pp. 918-920.

Popescu, V., Fadda, M., Murroni, M., Morgade, J., Angueira, P., Dec. 2014. Co-channel
and adjacent channel interference and protection issues for DVB-T2 and IEEE
802.22 WRAN operation. IEEE Trans. Broadcast. 60 (4), 693-700.

Qiao, M., Zhao, H., Wang, S., Wei, J., Nov. 2016. Mac protocol selection based on
machine learning in cognitive radio networks. In: 2016 19th International
Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications (WPMC), IEEE,
Shenzhen, China, pp. 453-458.

Qin, H., Cui, Y., Aug. 2009. Cross-layer design of cognitive radio network for real time
video streaming transmission. Sanya, China. In: Proc. ISECS International
Colloquium on Computing, Communication, Control, and Management (CCCM
2009), vol. 3, pp. 376-379.
M. Jalil Piran et al.

Quan, Z., Cui, S., Sayed, A.H., Feb. 2008. Optimal linear cooperation for spectrum
sensing in cognitive radio networks. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process. 2 (1), 28-40.

Rahama, Y.A., Hassan, M.S., Ismail, M.H., Mar. 2019. A stochastic-based rate control
approach for video streaming over cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans. Cognit.
Commun. Network. 5 (1), 181-192.

Recommendation F.700, 1996. Framework Recommendation for
Audiovisual/multimedia Services, ITU-T.

Rodriguez, P.M., Lizeaga, A., Mendicute, M., Val, I., Apr. 2019. Spectrum handoff
strategy for cognitive radio-based MAC for real-time industrial wireless sensor and
actuator networks. Comput. Network. 152, 186-198.

Roy, A., Sengupta, S., Wong, K.-K., Raychoudhury, V., Govindan, K., Singh, S., 2017. 5G
Wireless with Cognitive Radio and Massive IoT.

Russell, J. E., Robert, R. M. I., System, network, device and stacked spectrum method for
implementing spectrum sharing of multiple contiguous and non-contiguous
spectrum bands utilizing universal wireless access gateways to enable dynamic
security and bandwidth policy management, US Patent App. 15/846,188 (Apr.
2018).

Saad, W., Bennis, M., Jun. 2015. Game theory for future wireless networks: challenges
and opportunities. In: Proc. IEEE International Conference on Communications,
London, UK, pp. 2029-2034.

Saadat, S., Ashraf, N., Zikria, Y.B., Oct. 2013. Performance evaluation of MPEG4 video
traffic over 802.11 based cognitive radio network. Int. J. Res. Wirel. Syst. 2 (3).
Sadeghi, H., Azmi, P., Dec. 2008. Cyclostationarity-based cooperative spectrum sensing
for cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE International Symposium on

Telecommunications (IST 2008), Tehran, Iran, pp. 429-434.

Saki, H., Shikh-Bahaei, M., Mar. 2015. Cross-layer resource allocation for video
streaming over OFDMA cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans. Multimed. 17 (3),
333-345.

Saki, H., Shojaeifard, A., Shikh-Bahaei, M., Feb. 2014a. Cross-layer resource allocation
for video streaming over OFDMA cognitive radio networks with imperfect cross-link
CSI. In: Proc. IEEE International Conference on Computing, Networking and
Communications (ICNC), Honolulu, HI, USA, pp. 98-104.

Saki, H., Shojaeifard, A., Shikh-Bahaei, M., Feb. 2014b. Cross-layer resource allocation
for video streaming over OFDMA cognitive radio networks with imperfect cross-link
CSI. In: Proc. IEEE International Conference on Computing, Networking and
Communications (ICNC), Honolulu, HI, USA, pp. 98-104.

Saki, H., Martini, M.G., Shikh-Bahaei, M., Jun. 2015. Multi-user scalable video
transmission over cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE International Conference
on Communications (ICC), London, UK, pp. 7564-7569.

Salahdine, F., El Ghazi, H., Kaabouch, N., Fihri, W.F., Oct. 2015. Matched filter
detection with dynamic threshold for cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE
International Conference on Wireless Networks and Mobile Communications
(WINCOM), Marrakesh, Morocco.

Sanna, M., Murroni, M., May, 2010. Opportunistic wideband spectrum sensing for
cognitive radios with genetic optimization. In: 2010 IEEE International Conference
on Communications, Cape Town, South Africa, pp. 1-5.

Santana, G., Cristo, R.S., Dezan, C., Diguet, J.-P., Osorio, D.P., Branco, K.R., Jun. 2018.
Cognitive Radio for UAV communications: opportunities and future challenges. In:
2018 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS). IEEE, pp.
760-768.

Shah, G.A., Alagoz, F., Fadel, E.A., Akan, O.B., Sep. 2014. A spectrum-aware clustering
for efficient multimedia routing in cognitive radio sensor networks. IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol. 63 (7), 3369-3380.

Shiang, H.-P., van der Schaar, M., Aug. 2008. Queuing-based dynamic channel selection
for heterogeneous multimedia applications over cognitive radio networks. IEEE
Trans. Multimed. 10 (5), 896-909.

Shiang, H.-P., Van Der Schaar, M., Oct. 2008a. Delay-sensitive resource management in
multi-hop cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE 3rd Symposium on New Frontiers
in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (DySPAN 2008), Chicago, IL, USA.

Shiang, H.-P., Van Der Schaar, M., Oct. 2008b. Dynamic channel selection for multi-user
video streaming over cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE 15th International
Conference on Image Processing, (ICIP 2008), San Diego, CA, USA, pp. 2316-2319,

Shiang, H.-P., Van der Schaar, M., Feb. 2009. Distributed resource management in
multihop cognitive radio networks for delay-sensitive transmission. IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol. 58 (2), 941-953.

Shobana, S., Saravanan, R., Muthaiah, R., Feb. 2013. Matched filter based spectrum
sensing on cognitive radio for OFDM WLANs. Int. J. Eng. Technol. 5 (1), 142-146.

Shoham, Y., Powers, R., Grenager, T., Feb. 2006. If multi-agent learning is the answer,
what is the question? Artif. Intell. 171 (7), 365-377.

ShowMyWhiteSpace - Locate TV White Space Channels, http://whitespaces.
spectrumbridge.com/whitespaces/home.aspx, (Accessed 6 August 2019).

Shrestha, A.P., Yoo, S.-J., Jun. 2018. Optimal resource allocation using support vector
machine for wireless power transfer in cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol. 67 (9), 8525-8535.

Si, P., Yue, H., Zhang, Y., Fang, Y., Aug. 2016. Spectrum management for proactive
video caching in information-centric cognitive radio networks. IEEE J. Sel. Area.
Commun. 34 (8), 2247-2259.

Soltani, S., Mutka, M.W., Jun. 2013. Decision tree modeling for video routing in
cognitive radio mesh networks. In: Proc. IEEE 14th International Symposium on a
World of Wireless Mobile and Multimedia Networks (WoWMoM 2013), Madrid,
Spain.

Song, Y., Jiang, X., Apr. 2011. Performance analysis of spectrum handoff for cognitive
radio ad hoc networks without common control channel under homogeneous
primary traffic. In: Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, Shanghai, China,, pp. 3011-3019.

42

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

Song, Y., Xie, J., Jul. 2012. ProSpect: a proactive spectrum handoff framework for
cognitive radio ad hoc networks without common control channel. IEEE Trans.
Mobile Comput. 11 (7), 1127-1139.

Srinivasan, S., Shivakumar, K., Mohammad, M., Sep. 2019. Semi-supervised machine
learning for primary user emulation attack detection and prevention through
core-based analytics for cognitive radio networks. Int. J. Distributed Sens. Netw. 15
(9), 1-12.

Sudipta, D., Saha, M.I., Apr. 2017. Channel quality index based content aware novel CAS
for different video applications over CRN. In: Proc. IEEE International Conference
on Innovations in Electronics, Signal Processing and Communication (IESC), India,
pp. 84-88.

Sumathi, D., Manivannan, S., 2019. Machine learning-based algorithm for channel
selection utilizing preemptive resume priority in cognitive radio networks validated
by ns-2. Circ. Syst. Signal Process. 1-21.

Sun, S., May 2016. Cognitive heterogeneous networks for 5G: a unified design. In: Proc.
IEEE International Conference on Communications, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, pp.
2029-2034.

Sun, J., Modiano, E., Zheng, L., May 2006. Wireless channel allocation using an auction
algorithm. IEEE J. Sel. Area. Commun. 24 (5), 1085-1096.

Sun, H., Nallanathan, A., Wang, C.-X., Chen, Y., 2013. Wideband spectrum sensing for
cognitive radio networks: a survey. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 20 (2), 74-81.

Szuprowicz, B.O., 1995. Multimedia Networking. McGraw-Hill, Inc..

Tahir, M., Mohamad, H., Ramli, N., Jarot, S.P., Aug. 2012. Experimental implementation
of dynamic spectrum access for video transmission using USRP. In: IEEE
International Conference on Computer and Communication Engineering (ICCCE),
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, pp. 228-233.

Tandra, R., Sahai, A., Jun. 2005. Fundamental limits on detection in low SNR under
noise uncertainty. Atlanta, GA, USA. In: Proc. IEEE International Conference on
Wireless Networks, Communications and Mobile Computing, vol. 1, pp. 464-469.

Tang, H., Nov. 2005. Some physical layer issues of wide-band cognitive radio systems.
In: Proc. IEEE First International Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic
Spectrum Access Networks (DySPAN 2005), Baltimore, MD, USA, pp. 151-159.

Teng, Y., Song, M., 2017. Cross-layer optimization and protocol analysis for cognitive ad
hoc communications. IEEE Access 5, 18692-18706.

The 1st EAI International Conference on 5G for Future Wireless Networks, April 21-23,
2017, Beijing, China.

The European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations. https://
cept.org/ecc/groups/ecc/closed- groups/se-43/client/introduction/, (Accessed 21
August 2019).

The Finnish communication Regulatiory Authority - FICORA, http://publications.gc.ca/
collections/collection_2011/ic/Iu105-2-6-2011-eng.pdf, (Accessed 21 August
2019).

Thien, H.T., Vu-Van, H., Koo, I., Feb. 2018. Implementation of spectrum sensing with
video transmission for cognitive radio using USRP with GNU radio. Int. J. Internet,
Broadcast. Commun. 1 (1), 4-14.

Thirunavukkarasu, M., Murugappan, M., Mohan, M.S., Feb. 2013. Multichannel
cognitive cross layer optimization for improved video transmission. J. Comput. Sci.
9 (1), 43-54.

Tian, Z., Giannakis, G.B., Jun. 2006. A wavelet approach to wideband spectrum sensing
for cognitive radios. In: Proc. IEEE 1st International Conference on Cognitive Radio
Oriented Wireless Networks and Communications, Mykonos Island, Greece.

Tsalianis, A., Economides, A.A., Oct. 2000. QoS standards for distributed multimedia
application. In: Proc. IEEE International Communications Quality and Reliability
Workshop, Thessaloniki, Greece, pp. 13-17.

Tuan, P.V., Koo, I., Jul. 2016. Throughput maximization by optimizing detection
thresholds in full-duplex cognitive radio networks. IET Commun. 10 (11),
1355-1364.

U. Recomendation, 1079-2: Performance and Quality of Service Requirements for
International Mobile Telecommunications-2000 (IMT-2000) Access Networks.

Umbert, A., Sallent, O., Prez-Romero, J., Snchez-Gonzlez, J., Collins, D., Kist, M., May
2018. An experimental assessment of channel selection in cognitive radio networks.
In: IFIP International Conference on Artificial Intelligence Applications and
Innovations. Springer, pp. 78-88.

Vijayarani, R., Nithyanandan, L., Jul. 2017. Dynamic slot-based carrier scheduling
scheme for downlink multimedia traffic over LTE advanced networks with carrier
aggregation. Turk. J. Electr. Eng. Comput. Sci. 25 (4), 2796-2808.

Viriyasitavat, W., Tonguz, O.K., Bai, F., Nov. 2011. UV-CAST: an urban vehicular
broadcast protocol. IEEE Commun. Mag. 49 (11).

Vishram, M., Tong, L.C., Syin, C., Jul. 2014. List multi-coloring based fair channel
allocation policy for self coexistence in cognitive radio networks with QoS
provisioning. In: Proc. IEEE Region 10 Symposium, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, pp.
99-104.

Wang, H., Yao, Y.-D., Jan. 2018. Primary user boundary detection in cognitive radio
networks: estimated secondary user locations and impact of malicious secondary
users. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 67 (5), 4577-4588.

Wang, F., Krunz, M., Cui, S., Feb. 2008. Price-based spectrum management in cognitive
radio networks. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process. 2 (1), 74-87.

Wang, L., Yang, J., Song, X., Aug. 2017. A QoE-driven spectrum decision scheme for
multimedia transmissions over cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE 26th
International Conference on Computer Communication and Networks (ICCCN),
Vancouver, Canada.

Wang, C., Bian, D., Zhang, G., Cheng, J., Li, Y., 2018. A novel dynamic spectrum-sharing
method for integrated wireless multimedia sensors and cognitive satellite networks.
Sensors 18 (11), 3904.
M. Jalil Piran et al.

Wang, D., Song, B., Chen, D., Du, X., Jun. 2019. Intelligent cognitive radio in 5G:
Al-based hierarchical cognitive cellular networks. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 26 (3),
54-61.

Wei, Z., Zhao, B., Su, J.. May 2019. Cooperative sensing in cognitive radio ad hoc
networks. In: Proc. International Conference on Communications (ICC). IEEE,
Shanghai, China, pp. 1-6.

Welch, L.R., Feb. 2003. Hidden Markov models and the Baum-Welch algorithm. IEEE
Inf. Theor. Soc. Newsl. 53 (4).

Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications,
2008. Amendment 1: Radio Resource Measurement of Wireless LANs, ANSI/IEEE
Standard 802.11k.

Wolf, A., Mar. 2019. D4.2 Report on Technical and Quality of Service Viability. https://
projects.shift2rail.org/download.aspx?id13de043a-dde6-4216-a41e-4e2a7e6cl16ea.
(Accessed 6 August 2019).

Workshop on cognitive radio for fifth generation networks and spectrum (CRAFT 2015).
In: Twelfth International Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems, August
2015, pp. 25-28Brussels, Belgium.

Workshop on cognitive radio and innovative spectrum sharing paradigms for future
networks (CRAFT 2016). In: 27th Annual IEEE International Symposium on
Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, Sep. 2016, pp. 4-7 Valencia,
Spain.

Workshop on Emerging Massive MIMO and MillimeterWave Technologies for
Cooperative and Cognitive 5G/B5G NetworksMay 19, 2016. Liverpool, UK.

Wornell, G.W., Apr. 1996. Emerging applications of multirate signal processing and
wavelets in digital communications. Proc. IEEE 84 (4), 586-603.

Wu, K.W., Kuo, W.K., Jan. 2012. Game-based cross-layer channel allocation with
SVC-encoded multimedia streams in cognitive radio networks. Int. J. Netw. Manag.
22 (5), 397-417.

Wu, J., Li, Y., May 2017. A survey of spectrum prediction methods in cognitive radio
networks. In: Proc. AIP Conference, vol. 1834, Seoul, Korea.

Wu, Y., Lau, V.K., Tsang, D.H., Qian, L.P., May 2012. Energy-efficient delay-constrained
transmission and sensing for cognitive radio systems. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 61
(7), 3100-3113.

Wu, Y., Hu, F., Kumar, S., Zhu, Y., Talari, A., Rahnavard, N., Matyjas, J.D., Nov. 2014. A
learning-based QoE-driven spectrum handoff scheme for multimedia transmissions
over cognitive radio networks. IEEE J. Sel. Area. Commun. 32 (11), 2134-2148.

Wu, X., Huang, X.-L., Wu, J., Chen, J., Aug. 2015. Research on multimedia transmission
over cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE 10th International Conference on
Communications and Networking in China (ChinaCom), Shanghai, China, pp.
422-426.

Xu, Y., Hu, D., Mao, S., Oct. 2014. Relay-assisted multiuser video streaming in cognitive
radio networks. IEEE Trans. Circ. Syst. Video Technol. 24 (10), 1758-1770.

Yang, P., Li, L., Yin, J., Zhang, H., Liang, W., Chen, W., Han, Z., Aug. 2018. Dynamic
spectrum access in cognitive radio networks using deep reinforcement learning and
evolutionary game. In: Proc. International Conference on Communications in China
(ICCC), IEEE, Beijing, China, pp. 405-409.

Yao, R., Liu, Y., Liu, J., Zhao, P., Ci, S., Dec. 2014. Hierarchical-matching based scalable
video streaming over multi-channel cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE Global
Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Austin, TX, USA, pp. 1400-1405.

Yao, R., Liu, Y., Liu, J., Zhao, P., Ci, S., Mar. 2015. Utility-based H. 264/SVC video
streaming over multi-channel cognitive radio networks. IEEE Trans. Multimed. 17
(3), 434-449.

Yong, D., Li, X., Mar. 2013. Video on-demand streaming in cognitive wireless mesh
networks. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. 12 (3), 412-423.

Yu, F.R., Sun, B., Krishnamurthy, V., Ali, S., Feb. 2011a. Application layer QoS
optimization for multimedia transmission over cognitive radio networks. Wireless
Network 17 (2), 371-383.

Yu, F.R., Sun, B., Krishnamurthy, V., Ali, S., Feb. 2011b. Application layer QoS
optimization for multimedia transmission over cognitive radio networks. Wireless
Network 17 (2), 371-383.

Yu, L., Liu, C., Hua, S., Liu, M., Nov. 2014. Cognitive radio assisted quality
compensation for scalable video multicast in cellular networks. Signal Process.
Image Commun. 29 (10), 1092-1101.

Yue, W.-J., Zheng, B.-Y., Meng, Q.-M., Yue, W.-J., Aug. 2010. Combined energy
detection and one-order cyclostationary feature detection techniques in cognitive
radio systems. J. China Univ. Posts Telecommun. 17 (4), 18-25.

Zekavat, S.A., Li, X., Apr. 2006. Ultimate dynamic spectrum allocation via user-central
wireless systems. J. Commun. 1 (1), 60-67.

Zeng, Y., Liang, Y.-C., Apr. 2007. Covariance based signal detections for cognitive radio.
In: Proc. IEEE 2nd International Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum
Access Networks (DySPAN 2007), Dublin, Ireland, pp. 202-207.

Zeng, Y., Liang, Y.-C., May 2009. Spectrum sensing algorithms for cognitive radio based
on statistical covariances. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 58 (4), 1804-1815.

Zhang, Y., Jun. 2009. Spectrum handoff in cognitive radio networks: opportunistic and
negotiated situations. In: Proc. IEEE International Conference on Communications
(ICCO9), Dresden, Germany.

Zhang, G., Feng, S., Jul. 2010. Subcarrier allocation algorithms based on graph-coloring
in Cognitive Radio NC-OFDM system. In: Proc. IEEE 3rd International Conference on
Computer Science and Information Technology (ICCSIT), vol. 2, pp. 535-540
Chengdu, China.

Zhang, Y., Han, W., Li, D., Zhang, P., Cui, S., May 2015. Two-dimensional sensing in
energy harvesting cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE International Conference
on Communication Workshop (ICCW), ShahAlam, Malaysia, pp. 2029-2034.

43

 

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

Zhang, M., Wang, L., Feng, Y., Sep. 2018. Distributed cooperative spectrum sensing
based on reinforcement learning in cognitive radio networks. AEU-Int. J. Electron.
Commun. 94, 359-366.

Zhao, T., Liu, Q., Chen, C.W., First Quarter, 2017. QoE in video transmission: a user
experience-driven strategy. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 19 (1), 285-302.

Zheng, S., Yang, X., Chen, S., Lou, C., Dec. 2011. Target channel sequence selection
scheme for proactive-decision spectrum handoff. IEEE Commun. Lett. 15 (12),
1332-1334.

Zheng, G., Krikidis, I., orn Ottersten, B., May 2013. Full-duplex cooperative cognitive
radio with transmit imperfections. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 12 (5),
2498-2511.

Zheng, Z., Wu, F., Tang, S., Chen, G., Jun. 2016. AEGIS: an unknown combinatorial
auction mechanism framework for heterogeneous spectrum redistribution in
noncooperative wireless networks. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 24 (3), 1919-1932.

Zheng, K., Liu, X.-Y., Liu, X., Zhu, Y., Jul. 2019. Hybrid overlay-underlay cognitive radio
networks with energy harvesting. IEEE Trans. Commun. 67 (7).

Zhou, L., Wang, X., Tu, W., Muntean, G.M., Geller, B., Mar. 2010. Distributed scheduling
scheme for video streaming over multi-channel multi-radio multi-hop wireless
networks. IEEE J. Sel. Area. Commun. 28 (3).

Zhou, X., Sun, M., Li, G.Y., Juang, B.-H.F., Dec. 2018a. Intelligent wireless
communications enabled by cognitive radio and machine learning. China Commun.
15 (12), 16-48.

Zhou, F., Wu, Y., Hu, R.Q., Wang, Y., Wong, K.K., 2018b. Energy-efficient noma enabled
heterogeneous cloud radio access networks. IEEE Netw. 32 (2), 152-160.

Zhu, J., Xu, C., Guan, J., Zhang, H., Jun. 2014. Spectrum auctions for multimedia
streaming over mobile cognitive radio networks. In: Proc. IEEE International
Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB), Beijing,
2014.

Zhu, R., Li, Y., Gao, F., Wang, J., Xu, X., Dec. 2015. Relay opportunistic spectrum sharing
based on the full-duplex transceiver. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 64 (12), 5789-5803.

Zubair, S., Fisal, N., Maqbool, W., Abazeed, M.B., AbdulAzeez, H.T., Salihu, B.A., Nov.
2013. Online priority aware streaming framework for cognitive radio sensor
networks. In: Proc. IEEE Malaysia International Conference on Communications
(MICC), KL, Malaysia, pp. 234-239.

Md. Jalil Piran is an Assistant Professor with the Depart-
ment of Computer Science and Engineering, Sejong Univer-
wa= sity, Seoul South Korea. Jalil Piran completed his PhD in Elec-
tronics and Radio Engineering from Kyung Hee University,
South Korea, in 2016. Subsequently, he continued his work
as a Postdoctoral Research fellow in the field of “Resource
Management” and “Quality of Experience” in “5G Cellular
Networks” and “Internet of Things” in the Networking Lab,
Kyung Hee University. Dr. Jalil Piran published substantial
number of technical papers in well-known international jour-
nals and conferences in research fields of “SG and 6G Wire-
less Communications, Internet of Things (IoT), Multimedia
Communication, Cognitive Radio Networks, Applied Machine
Learning, Security, and Smart Grid.” He received “IAAM Sci-
entist Medal of the year 2017” for notable and outstanding
research in the field of New Age Technology & Innovation, in
Stockholm, Sweden. Moreover, he has been recognized as the
“Outstanding Emerging Researcher” by the Iranian Ministry
of Science, Technology, and Research in 2017. In addition,
his PhD dissertation has been selected as the “Dissertation of
the Year 2016” by the Iranian Academic Center for Education,
Culture, and Research in the field of Electrical and Communi-
cations Engineering. In the worldwide communities, Dr. Jalil
Piran is an active member of Institute of Electrical and Elec-
tronics Engineering (IEEE) since 2010, an active delegate from
South Korea in Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG) since
2013, and an active member of International Association of
Advanced Materials (IAAM) since 2017.

Quoc-Viet Pham received the B.S. degree in electronics and
telecommunications engineering from Hanoi University of Sci-
ence and Technology, Vietnam, in 2013, and the M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees, both in telecommunications engineering, from
Inje University, South Korea, in 2015 and 2017 respectively.
He is currently a research professor at Research Institute of
Computer, Information and Communication, Pusan National
University, South Korea. From Sept. 2017 to Dec. 2019, he was
with Kyung Hee University, Changwon National University,
and Inje University on various academic positions. He received

_ the best PhD thesis award in Engineering from Inje University
in 2017. His research interests include convex optimization,

{ game theory, and machine learning to mobile edge/cloud com-
puting, and resource allocation for 5G wireless networks and
beyond. He is a member of the IEEE.

 
M. Jalil Piran et al.

 

 

S.M. Riazul Islam is an Assistant Professor with the Dept.
of Computer Science and Engineering at Sejong University,
Korea. From 2014 to 2017, he worked at the Wireless Com-
munications Research Center, Inha University, Korea as a Post-
doctoral Fellow. From 2005 to 2014, he was with the Univer-
sity of Dhaka, Bangladesh as an Assistant Professor and Lec-
turer at the Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering. Dr.
Islam received his Ph.D. degree in Information and Communi-
cation Engineering from Inha University, South Korea in 2012.
His research interests include wireless communications, inter-
net of things, wireless health, and machine learning.

Sukhee Cho received her BS and MS in computer science from
Pukyong National University, Rep. of Korea, in 1993 and 1995
respectively, and her PhD in electrical and computer engineer-
ing from Yokohama National University, Japan, in 1999. She
joined Electronics and Telecommunications Research Insti-
| tute (ETRI), Rep. of Korea in 1999, as a senior member of
engineering staff and is now a principal researcher. Her cur-
rent research interests include video processing, video coding,
media application format and metadata for media delivery ser-
vices.

Byungjun Bae received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in
electronics engineering from Kyungpook National University,
Korea in 1995, 1997, and 2006, respectively. From 1997 to
2000, he was a researcher at LG Electronics Inc. where he
worked on digital signal processing in digital television. Since
2000, he has been with the media research division in Elec-
tronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI),
Daejeon, Korea. He has also been a professor with the Depart-
ment of Communication & Media Technology at the University
of Science and Technology(UST), Daejeon, Korea. His current
research interests include next-generation broadcasting pro-
tocols and systems, emergency information signal processing,
and intelligent media processing.

44

 

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 172 (2020) 102759

Doug Young Suh received the BSc degree in Department of
Nuclear Engineering from Seoul University, South Korea in
1980, MSc and Ph.D. degrees from Department of Electrical
Engineering in Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Geor-
gia, USA, in 1986 and 1990 respectively. In September 1990,
he joined Korea Academy of Industry and Technology and con-
ducted research on HDTV until 1992. Since February 1992, he
is a professor in College of Electronics and Information Engi-
neering in Kyung Hee University, South Korea. His research
interests include networked video and video compression. He
has been working as a Korean delegate for ISO/IEC MPEG
since 1996.

Zhu Han received the B.S. degree in electronic engineer-
ing from Tsinghua University, in 1997, and the M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from
the University of Maryland, College Park, in 1999 and 2003,
respectively. From 2000 to 2002, he was an R&D Engineer of
JDSU, Germantown, Maryland. From 2003 to 2006, he was a
Research Associate at the University of Maryland. From 2006
to 2008, he was an assistant professor at Boise State Uni-
versity, Idaho. Currently, he is a Professor in the Electrical
and Computer Engineering Department as well as in the Com-
puter Science Department at the University of Houston, Texas.
His research interests include wireless resource allocation and
management, wireless communications and networking, game
theory, big data analysis, security, and smart grid. Dr. Han
received an NSF Career Award in 2010, the Fred W. Eller-
sick Prize of the IEEE Communication Society in 2011, the
EURASIP Best Paper Award for the Journal on Advances in
Signal Processing in 2015, IEEE Leonard G. Abraham Prize
in the field of Communications Systems (best paper award in
IEEE JSAC) in 2016, and several best paper awards in IEEE
conferences. Currently, Dr. Han is an IEEE Communications
Society Distinguished Lecturer.
