International Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering (J ECE)
Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020, pp. 5871~5882
ISSN: 2088-8708, DOI: 10.1159 1/ijece.v1016.pp587 1-5882 O 5871

Automatic recognition of the digital modulation types using
the artificial neural networks

Saad S. Hreshee
Electrical Engineering Department, College of Engineering, University of Babylon, Iraq

Article Info ABSTRACT

As digital communication technologies continue to grow and evolve,
applications for this steady development are also growing. This growth has

Article history:

Received Jul 19, 2019
Revised May 7, 2020
Accepted May 27, 2020

generated a growing need to look for automated methods for recognizing and
classifying the digital modulation type used in the communication system,
which has an important effect on many civil and military applications.

This paper suggests a recognizing system capable of classifying multiple and

different types of digital modulation methods (64QAM, 2PSK, 4PSK, 8PSK,
Keywords: 4ASK, 2FSK, 4FSK, 8FSK). This paper focuses on trying to recognize
the type of digital modulation using the artificial neural network (ANN) with
its complex algorithm to boost the performance and increase the noise
immunity of the system. This system succeeded in recognizing all the digital
modulation types under the current study without any prior information.
The proposed system used 8 signal features that were used to classify these 8
modulation methods. The system succeeded in achieving a recognition ratio of
at least 68% for experimental signals on a signal to noise ratio
(SNR=5dB) and 89.1% for experimental signals at (SNR=10dB) and 91% for
experimental signals at (SNR=15dB) for a channel with additive white
gaussian noise (AWGN).

Artificial neural networks
Digital modulation

Smart receivers

Software defined radios

Copyright © 2020 Institute of Advanced Engineering and Science.
All rights reserved.

Corresponding Author:

Saad S. Hreshee,

Department of Electrical Engineering,

College of Engineering,

University of Babylon,

Hillah-Najaf Road, Hillah City, Babylon, Iraq.
Email: hreshee@ gmail.com

1. INTRODUCTION

The automatic recognition techniques (ART) of the modulation type of the received signal are an
intermediate process between the initial processing of the received signal and the process of selecting and
detecting the appropriate demodulator. These systems determine the modulation type of the signal used in
the transmitting side, after extracting the features of that signal that help with the recognition process,
which will enable us later to know the information in this signal by inputting it on the appropriate signal
demodulator as shown in Figure 1 [1].

ART of the modulation type plays an important role in many civil and military applications [2].
ART can be used in the military field, in the electronic scanning and surveillance processes, where the recognition
of the modulation type is very important in the national security by detecting a potential threat, which can then be
concealed or jamming [2]. In the civil field, ART can be used in spectrum management processes, wireless
network management, and frequency interference recognition. ART of the modulation type also plays a key role
in the Software Defined Radios SDR and the intelligent receiver [1, 2].

Previously, the modulation type recognition processes were carried out with wide-beam receivers
designed to be capable of scanning the entire spectrum. The modulation recognition process is made depending
on the time format of the signal that appears on the output unit, based on this time format, the operator guessed

Journal homepage: http://ijece.iaescore.com/index.php/IJ ECE
5872 O ISSN: 2088-8708

the type of modulation [3]. Obviously, this method of recognition requires a lot of effort versus poor
performance and a high probability of error because it relies heavily on operator skills and experience [1].
The use of transmission recognition methods leads to the use and development of new ART like the input of
the received modulated signal to all possible signal detectors and then recognition of the modulation type by
comparing the output values of all detectors. The difficulty and poor performance of this method are also clear
and are no longer used, especially after the use of digital data [4].

    
     

RF Information
signal Pre-processing of Delay Selecting Signal signal
received signal circuit demodulator type demodulation

    

Demodulation Recognize
of signal the

features modulation

Figure 1. Block diagram for a communications system to recognize the type of modulation
and demodulation [2]

In the mid and late of the 1980s, two important ways of ART, which led to a significant development
in this area. These two methods are the decision theoretic approach (DT) and the static pattern (SP) and both
methods depend on guessing a separation algorithm and choose the appropriate thresholds for them [5, 6].
It is noted here that if these thresholds are not selected very precisely, this will result in a decrease in
the algorithm performance, especially when the noise is present, so there is a need to find other methods to
recognize the type of modulation that is better performing even with noise.

Since the beginning of the 1990s [7, 8], there has been oriented towards industrial intelligence in
the general recognition and classification processes, which has allowed it to be used to recognize the types of
modulation. This step has greatly improved the performance of the system than it was, especially in
the presence of noise. Most of the previously proposed methods were designed to recognize analog modulation
methods, but recent contributions and researches on this subject are more focused on digital communications
because of the increasing use of digital modulation [8, 9].

Most of the existing ART of the modulation type can recognize and classify a few types of digital
modulation methods [8]. Most of which can determine the type of digital modulation from signals with high
SNR, but with increasing the noise, the results will be worst and the system then will be unable to determine
the type of digital modulation. The importance of this research is to adapt artificial intelligence to propose an
ART system capable of recognizing and classifying many different types of digital modulation methods. Using
an Artificial Neural Network with its complex algorithm is to increase both the performance of the system and
the immunity against noise even with signals of low SNR.

2. RESEARCH AIM
This paper depends on the computational simulation method and mathematical modeling by using

MATLAB program for its accuracy and simplicity to convert the models based on it to the real-time

applications and followed the following methodology:

- Study and analyze the types of digital modulation under study.

- Investigation of the most important parameters of the studied digital modulation techniques.

- Analyze and compare these parameters at different values of SNR and examine their immune to
this noise.

- The establishment of the artificial neural network (ANN), which will separate the types of digital
modulation understudy and then learning this network by two vectors (the inputs and targets vectors) that
extracted from the key features with different noise levels. Through these two vectors, the network will be
learned to be able to recognize the digital modulation type used even if the SNR has decreased and reached
a low value.

- Testing the ANN.

3. MODULATION METHODS UNDER STUDY

Int J Elec & Comp Eng, Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020 : 5871 - 5882
Int J Elec & Comp Eng ISSN: 2088-8708 O 5873

The modulation is one of the most important operations in the transmitter of the communications
system. Since we cannot send the RF signal of the message wirelessly directly through the transmission
channel, because it is usually of low frequencies, i.e. with large wavelengths and since the antenna length is
usually equal to half or a quarter of the wavelength, its realization is practically impossible. The frequencies of
various messages are also located within the same bandwidth. If the signals were sent directly, it will be
overlapped making their separation in the receiver impossible. Therefore, these messages or signals
are carried on high-frequency waves called (carriers) and supposed to have the corresponding frequency
characteristics of the transmission channel. This carrying process is called modulation. In digital modulation
techniques, an analog carrier signal is usually modulated by a binary message code, and this is carried out by
changing one of the physical characteristics of the analog carrier (amplitude, frequency, phase or
a combination of them) according to the change in the instantaneous value of the message signal containing
the information [2, 10]. When the signal passes through a channel, it loses some of its energy and this is due to
the impedance of the channel which causes the attenuation [11]. The shape of the signal also changes due to
the distortion. The attenuation and distortion occur when more than one signal arrives through a lousy channel
to the receiver side with different frequencies. Random noise is one of source of transmission losses,
which generated from artificial sources and several natural. These losses in the transmitted signal make
the identification of the modulation type used in the transmission of the signal is very difficult. In this paper,
we will try to recognize the digital modulation type using artificial intelligence, so we'll take a quick look at
the four types of digital modulation presented in this study. Figure 2 illustrate the diference between the theae
modulation types (ASK, FSK, and PSK).

"binary digits itude-shitt key
ib ‘f i _
At tt lee

SOAINIAHY

eect i 1

Tan eS
2 |
-_

oar

E

 

Figure 2. Digital modulation signal with binary ASK, FSK, and PSK

3.1. Amplitude shift keying (ASK)

This method of digital modulation corresponds to the amplitude modulation (AM) in the analog
modulation. ASK is the amplitude modulation of the sinusoidal carrier wave, but with a digital signal,
i.e. consists of ones and zeros. Thus, the carrier's amplitude changes as a result of the modulation between two

values correspond to the Zeros and Ones as shown in Figure 2. Figure 3 show the digital modulation scheme
of the binary ASK [11].

     
  

ASK
Output
(band

limited)

Sinusoidal
Carrier

Unipolar
binary sequence
(message)

Figure 3. Digital modulation scheme of the binary ASK
3.2. Frequency shift keying (FSK)

Automatic recognition of the digital modulation types using the artificial neural networks (Saad S. Hreshee)
5874. O ISSN: 2088-8708

This method of digital modulation corresponds to the frequency modulation (FM) method of analog
modulation. This frequency modulation is relatively simple and has low performance. The carrier frequency
changes here between two values, when the digital modulation signal is a logical zero, the transmitted
frequency is f;, while when the digital modulation signal is a logical one, the transmitted frequency is f,
as shown in Figure 2 while Figure 4 shows the digital modulation scheme of the binary FSK [11].

3.3. Phase shift keying (PSK)

This method in the digital modulation corresponds to the phase modulation method (PM) in
the analog modulation. The PSK modulation is a form of frequency modulation, and the resulting signal after
the modulation has a limited number of positions. When the number of phase positions of the output phase is
two, the modulation method is called binary phase shift keying (BPSK) as shown in Figure 2 [11].
When phase positions of the output phase are four, the modulation called quadrature phase shift keying
(QPSK). The phase positions of the output phase may become eight, which is called the eight-phase shift keying
that is denoted by (8PSK), and the number of phase angle positions can be sixteen, the modulation being
described as the hexadecimal phase shift keying and denoted by (16PSK) see Figure 5 for the digital modulation

scheme of the binary PSK.
Balance PSK
Modulator ' wave

8 1
‘ 1
' i :
f, ( Ose Likes wave Carrier wave

   

2 | generator
pf
5 {| []_. Binary
Binary fi = fr sequence
message Bit rate f, < f, (data)
Figure 4. Digital modulation scheme of Figure 5. Digital modulation scheme of
the binary FSK the binary PSK

3.4. Orthogonal QAM modulation

Orthogonal QAM modulation is a type of digital modulation, where the information is located in both
amplitude and phase of the signal. It is difficult to distinguish between a quadrilateral and 4PSK, but it is easy
to note the difference between QAM and PSK when the number of levels is higher than 4 or 16 (see Figure 6
that illustrates the digital modulation scheme of QAM) [11].

cosw,(t)

 
      
     
   
 
 

D/A X;(t) 4

D/A SO

Clock sinw,(t)

Serial to
Parallel
converter

Bit Stream
x (t)

Figure 6. Digital modulation scheme of QAM

4. KEY FEATURES

The major challenge in the modulation recognition and classification systems is always in the process
of finding a set of key features. These keys must be reduced in order to reduce the number of inputs on
the recognizer or the classifier (artificial neural network in this paper) also its complexity must be low to be
easy to calculate and suitable for real-time applications. At the same time, it must include all the necessary key

Int J Elec & Comp Eng, Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020 : 5871 - 5882
Int J Elec & Comp Eng ISSN: 2088-8708 O 5875

features to ensure a reliable recognition and classification process. So, the ART process can be representing
a balancing process between these two considerations.

Many numerous properties are imposed by different digital signals. Therefore, the appropriate features
should be selected to identify these signals. These features are selected depending on their sensitivity to
the type of digital modulation and on being insensitive to noisy channels and variations of SNR.

The eight key features proposed and studied in this paper can be calculated from the instantaneous
characteristics of the signal (instantaneous amplitude, instantaneous frequency, and non-linear instantaneous
phase) as shown in Figure 7. ASK can be recognized depending based on their amplitude variations,
the FSK may be classified by its fixed instantaneous amplitude, and the PSK information is defined by its
phase [2, 12-14].

 

 

 

 

Input Signal
it
Instantaneous Instantaneous Non-linear
Amplitude Frequency Instantaneous Phase
OF z Oy
Ymax f
Kur;

 

 

 

Figure 7. Key features

The eight features have been selected and used in this paper to separate the following basic digital
modulation methods (64QAM, 2PSK, 4PSK, 8PSK, 4ASK, 2FSK, 4FSK, 8FSK). These key features, in turn,
are based on three values of the received signal y(i) which is:

4.1. Instantaneous amplitude a(i):

Instantaneous amplitude represents the instantaneous value of the signal y(i). This instantaneous
value can produce two important signals: the modified instantaneous value A,(i) and the central modified
instantaneous value A,,,(i) [12].

Modified instantaneous value A, (i):

) 40
An) = “8 (1)
Central modified instantaneous value A,, (i):
; A(i)
Acn(i) = | —1 (2)
A
where m, represents the average value of the instantaneous terminal.
4.2. Non-linear instantaneous phase Oy, (i)
The instantaneous phase of the modulated signal consists of two components:
Linear component: This is caused by the carrier. A non-linear component: which is caused by the modulated

signal (information). The non-linear component @y; (i) for the phase of the signal y(i) calculated by subtracting
the linear component of the phase from the overall phase @(i) [12].

Automatic recognition of the digital modulation types using the artificial neural networks (Saad S. Hreshee)
5876 O ISSN: 2088-8708

4.3. Instantaneous frequency
The instantaneous frequency represented by:

fo=298 ©)

2m at

 

This means, that the instantaneous frequency represents the instantaneous changes in phase. This instantaneous
frequency can produce an important signal, which is the instantaneous central frequency that is given by:

 

fu = [F4] (4)

where my represents the main value of instantaneous frequency and fg represent the symbol rate.

4.4. Key features

The first key: (0, ) the standard deviation of the nonlinear instantaneous phase: This key feature helps
to separate between digital modulation methods that carry the information by phase from other modulation
methods. In such methods, there will be a transition of the instantaneous phase with different phase-steps,
depending on the level of the modulation, so the value of this key will be small for these modulations [14].

2
Op = x (Danco >ae On (i)) ~ w (Danco >ael Prt (i) \) (5)

where N, is the number of samples in {@y,} for Ang) > Az, where A; is the threshold value of Ay) when
the filter provides the minimum amplitude of the signal sample due to high noise sensitivity and @y; (i) is
the nonlinear component of the i" instantaneous phase of the sample.

The second key: (m,) the average value of the instantaneous amplitude: The average value of
the instantaneous amplitude for all modulation methods under study except (64QAM, 4ASK) is close to one.
For the 4ASK method, since the absolute value of the signal changes between the two values {1, 1/3},
the average value of the instantaneous amplitude is equal to 2/3, while this value will be greater than one for
the orthogonal amplitude modulation method (64QAM) [14].

The third key: (o7) Standard deviation of instantaneous frequency: The digital modulation methods
that carry the information by frequency are 8FSK, 4FSK, 2FSK and therefore its instantaneous frequency
changes either between two values for the 2FSK method or between four value for the 4FSK method or between
eight values for the method 8FSK. Although the intervals between these values are the same for all these
methods, while for other methods, their instantaneous frequency is equal to zero. This key is therefore used to
differentiate the digital modulation methods (8FSK, 4FSK, 2FSK) from the other modulation methods and this
key can also be used to differentiate between these methods (the instantaneous frequency change area in 8FSK
method is twice the area of frequency change in the 4FSK method, which is four times the area of frequency
changes in the 2FSK method [14].

0 = |*(Sarooa fe O)-* (SanoralfvOl). 6)

The fourth key: (o,) The standard deviation of the instantaneous amplitude: It is another key feature
that performs the same work of the key (m,) and is used for the same features [14].

 

Oa = | ON Abn) — 57 DAO? (7)

The fifth key: (Ymax ¢) The maximum value of the spectral power density of the central instantaneous
frequency: This key helps to differentiate between the digital modulation methods (8FSK, 4FSK, 2FSK) and
any other modulation methods (as (o7) works). As the instantaneous frequency change area of 8FSK is twice

the area of instantaneous frequency change for 4FSK and four times the area of instantaneous frequency change
for 2FSK so the 8FSK method has a higher value than they are in the two cases 4FSK and 2FSK which enables
the differentiation between 8FSK, 4FSK, 2FSK methods. This key can be determined by [14]:

Int J Elec & Comp Eng, Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020 : 5871 - 5882
Int J Elec & Comp Eng ISSN: 2088-8708 O 5877

Ymaxf — max|DFT (fen (i)) |” (8)

The symbol DFT represents the Discrete Fourier transform.

The sixth key: (Vmax q) the maximum value of the spectral power density of the central instantaneous
amplitude: This key helps to differentiate between the digital modulation methods that carry the information
by amplitude i.e. (64QAM, 4ASK) and other methods of modification. This feature is given in the following
relationship [14]:

Ymaxa — max|DFT (Aen (i))| /Ng (9)

where N, represents the number of samples in one frame of the signal.
The seventh key: (Kur) The fourth-degree torque of the central instantaneous amplitude: which
given by:

Kur, = ams (10)
{E {azn (n)}}
where E {} represents the expected value.
The fourth-degree torque represents the kurtosis around the average. It’s found that this key helps to
differentiate between digital modulation methods that carry information in the amplitude, which has a small
kurtosis than other methods [14].
Eighth key: (Kur; ) The fourth-degree torque of the central instantaneous frequency: which given by:

4
Kur, = nm (11)
{E(u}
This feature helps to differentiate between digital modulation methods that carry information by frequency of
the other methods of modification [14].

5. ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS

For the recognition and classification processes, many techniques were found [3], one of these
techniques was the artificial neural network (ANN), which is one of the most appropriate methods in
the signal classification [3, 15]. Artificial neural networks are a collection of algorithms, working as
the human brain neurons. These networks are designed to recognize patterns. The patterns identified by these
networks are numerical, included in vectors, which must be translated into all real-world data, i.e. images,
audio, text or time series. ANNs help to recognize and classify [16-18].

ANN merits in the ART are its high classification rate, reduced computational complexity,
and improved accuracy. While its demerits are ineffective when a large number of input features are used and
any small data set requires long training time for computation. In this paper, depending on neural network
characteristics, we used the feedforward with multi-layered neural networks as a classifier and identifier and
for the optimization of the network weights, we use backpropagation algorithm as the most common
algorithms, using the controlled learning method, with the number of training pairs composed of patterns vector
and targets vector as shown in Figure 8.

The aim of weights optimization is to get a stable state that makes the network properly responsive to
the patterns vector used in the training process and to any new input vector and the training process continues
until the error that exists between the output vector and the target to the smallest value (threshold value) which
is predetermined (see Figure 8).

In this paper, the previous eight features used to build the patterns vector. The patterns vector was got
from the concluding of the key features from a noisy modulated signal, i.e. a signal that crossed
a communication channel, and a known modulation type and so we have another vector which is the targets
vector. The neural network was learned through the patterns and targets vectors to get the ability to recognize
and classify the type of digital modulation. This neural network was subjected to several experiments to change
and modify its structure (changing the number of hidden layers or the number of nodes in these hidden layers
or change the learning algorithm) until it finally got the best results appropriate for this application [19-25].

Automatic recognition of the digital modulation types using the artificial neural networks (Saad S. Hreshee)
5878 O ISSN: 2088-8708

Initialize input

 

Calculate the key features for

each modulation type ; |

sugges cey fi Ss, on :
From the suggested key features Modify weights and
Calculate the patterns vector for a noisy bases
. a
modulated signal

 

 

Define the target vector from a known No
modulation type

 

 

 

Are the
Divide Data into sets: Training Data, Test training loops
Data and Validation Data complete?
Create Feedforward,
Backpropagation with 2 hidden t No
layers Network
v Is the error

Train the Network smaller than
y | the threshold?
Error calculation

yes

 

Save weights of the best Neural Network
architecture and training parameters

+

stop

 

Figure 8. The block diagram of the backpropagation algorithm

6. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The MATLAB environment was used to write system programs because it is a high-level language
that contains libraries for communication and signal processing systems as well as a library of neural networks.
So, we used parameters of this library to design, learning, and test the back-propagation, artificial neural
network used in our system. Simulation programs to generate digital modulation signals proposed in this paper
at a sampling frequency f, = 1200kHz and the coding rate f; = 12.5kHz to produce a specified number of
frames for each digital modulation method and then partition the signal within a frame of length (4096) sample
that determined to achieve the best results.

The eight key features of each frame were then extracted and grouped into one vector and for the best
performance, a median filter was used with a window of seven samples, a sixth-degree non-recursive filter used
to pass the signal through it before concluding the key features. Figure 9 to Figure 12 show the relationship
between the key features of the digital modulation methods understudy with the signal-to-noise ratio that changes
between (0-20 dB) for an AWGN communication channel. We have included these curves to show how reliable
these parameters are and how it is immune to Noise.

In order to give the learning to the artificial neural network, the key features were calculated at two
values of SNR to eventually form the input vector (pattern vector) and the output vector (target vector) used to
learn the network. The neural network proposed here consisting of an input layer with a number of nodes equal
to the number of key features, two hidden layers and an output layer with a number of nodes equal to
the number of modulation methods that must be recognized. Figure 9 to Figure 12 illustrate that with small
values of SNR, most of the modulation methods are clear and can be detected but when the SNR increases,
the value of key features begins to decrease clearly and converge with each other so that there is a difficulty to
recognize between these methods while the methods that depend on the specified key feature will be
distinguishable.

Int J Elec & Comp Eng, Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020 : 5871 - 5882
Int J Elec & Comp Eng ISSN: 2088-8708 O 5879

p)

oo

standard deviation (o
average value (m

 

 

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
SNR [dB] SNR [dB]

(a) (b)

Figure 9. The effect of SNR for, (a) standard deviation of the non-linear instantaneous phase,
(b) the average value of the instantaneous amplitude

 

 

0.8

standard deviation (c,)
standard deviation (0)
nN
T

5
nD

0.4

0.2 |-

 

 

 

 

 

i 1 sl
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
SNR [dB]

(a) (b)

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
SNR [dB]

Figure 10. The effect of SNR for, (a) standard deviation of the instantaneous frequency,
(b) the standard deviation of the instantaneous amplitude

 

 

25 T T T T T

250

)
i]
S

 

Ed
>
o

am
T
\

  
 

a

So

T
Ss

>
o
maximum SPO of the central amplitude Vinexe

maximum value of the spectrum power density (Venex 1)

s

 

 

 

 

0 a - 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 2
SNR [dB]

SNR [dB]

(a) (b)

Figure 11. The effect of SNR for, (a) the maximum value of the spectral power density of the central
instantaneous frequency, (b) the maximum value of the spectral power density of the central
instantaneous amplitude

Automatic recognition of the digital modulation types using the artificial neural networks (Saad S. Hreshee)
5880 O ISSN: 2088-8708

 

 

—8— OAM

 

torque central instantaneous amplitude (Kura)
torque central instantaneous frequency (Kurf)

  

r 4 L 1 | j
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
SNR [dB] SNR [48]

 

(a) (b)

Figure 12. The effect of SNR for, (a) the fourth-degree torque of the central instantaneous amplitude,
(b) the fourth-degree torque of instantaneous central frequency attributed

After completing the learning of the artificial neural network, we tested this network to recognize
a testing modulated signals transmitted to the network, see Figure 13. As seen in Table 1, the modulation type
with deferent recognition techniques and deferent SNRs used in some of the previous works are compared with
the results of this paper.

BSNRSdB @SNR10dB &SNR1iSdB

 

 

 

 

 

28
eS) 8s 82) SS) 88 | 828| «#,
a — 5
ga
& & ¥ s
oY o
x x
mo 8 5
“) wn
| |
7
64QAM 2PSK 4PSK SPSK 4ASK 2FSK 4FSK SFSK OVERALL
LEARNING
RATIO

Figure 13. Recognition percentage ratios for each modulation type at different values SNR

Table 1. A comparison of the results of this study with some of the classification methods of digital
modulation used previously

References The used modulation types The used model and technique The obtained success rate (%)
Almohamad et al. 2ASK, QPSK, 16QAM PCA + SVM 99.83 (on average)
[26] (SNR: 0 - 30 dB)
Ali, and Yangyu BPSK, 4QAM, 16QAM, 2-Layered deep neural network model 95.40
[9] 64QAM (SNR: 10 dB)
Dai et al. 2PAM, 4PAM, 8PAM, A fully connected 2-layer feed-forward 94.50
[27] 2PSK, 4PSK, 8PSK, deep neural network (DNN)
16QAM, 64QAM, (SNR: 15 dB)
256QAM
Our work 64QAM, 2PSK, 4PSK, Feedforward + Backpropagation with 2 68%, 89.1%, 91% respectively
8PSK, 4ASK, 2FSK, hidden layers ANN but when we exclude the PSK,
4FSK, 8FSK (SNR: 5, 10, and 15 dB) the result will be 75.2%, 98.8%,
99.6% respectively

Int J Elec & Comp Eng, Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020 : 5871 - 5882
Int J Elec & Comp Eng ISSN: 2088-8708 O 5881

7. CONCLUSION

In this study, an artificial neural network with an input-layer of eight nodes, two hidden-layers and an
output-layer of eight nodes too are used to get the best results. The proposed system proves its ability to achieve
a recognition ratio of 68% for a testing signal with SNR=5dB, and 89.1% for a testing signal with SNR=10dB
and 91% is known for a testing signal with SNR=15dB. The channel proposed in this work was the AWGN
and hence the relatively low recognition rate for the SNR=5dB is due to the high sensitivity of some of
the selected determinants of high noise. Some types of modulation understudy got the best recognition ratio,
where the 64QAM was the best one, while another modulation technique which is the 4PSK got the lowest
recognition. Truly, when we exclude all the PSK modulation method studded in this paper, the result will be
75.2%, 98.8%, 99.6% for the SNR= (5dB, 10dB, and 15dB) respectively and that means, the PSK is very
sensitive to the AWGN channel. The proposed ANN recognition algorithm is very efficient in the 64QAM and
4ASK in any SNR ratio. For the M-FSK modulation method, the proposed algorithm can be representing
a good recognition method for the high values of SNR. The study also proved that the ANN algorithm is not
efficient for M-PSK modulation signals, especially for large M.

REFERENCES

[1] M.L.D. Wong and A. K. Nandi, “Automatic Digital Modulation Recognition Using Artificial Neural Network and
Genetic Algorithm,” Signal Processing, vol. 84, no. 2, pp. 351-365, 2004.

[2] D. P. Quinot, “Design of a Radio Direction Finder for Search and Rescue Operations: Estimation, Sonification, and
Virtual Prototyping,’ Ph.D. Thesis, Pierre and Marie Curie University, 2015.

[3] N.A. Ahi, et al., “Autism Spectrum Disorder Classification on Electroencephalogram Signal Using Deep Learning
Algorithm,” [AES International Journal of Artificial Intelligence (IJ Al), vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 91-99, 2020.

[4] J.J. Popoola and R. van Olst, “Automatic Classification of Combined Analog and Digital Modulation Schemes Using
Feedforward Neural Network,” IEEE Africon Conference, Livingstone, Zambia, pp. 1-6, 2011.

[5] F. Jondral, “Automatic Classification of High Frequency Signals,’ Signal Processing, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 177-190,
1985.

[6] J. Aisbett, “Automatic Modulation Recognition Using Time Domain Parameters,” Signal Processing, vol. 13,
no. 3, pp. 323-328, 1987.

[7] A. Sarkar, “Multilayer Neural Network Synchronized Secured Session Key Based Encryption In Wireless
Communication,” IAES International Journal of Artificial Intelligence (IJAD), vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 44-53, 2019.

[8] G.Arulampalam, et al., “Classification Of Digital Modulation Schemes Using Neural Networks,’ ISSPA Proceedings
of the Fifth International Symposium on Signal Processing and its Applications, vol. 2, pp. 649-652, 1999.

[9] A. Ali and F. Yangyu, “Unsupervised Feature Learning and Automatic Modulation Classification Using Deep
Learning Model,” Physical Communication, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 75-84, 2017.

[10] B. Kim, et al., “Deep Neural Network-Based Automatic Modulation Classification Technique,” International
Conference on Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC 2016), pp. 579-582, 2016.

[11] S.D. Borde and K. R. Joshi, “Enhanced Signal Detection Algorithm Using Trained Neural Network For Cognitive
Radio Receiver,” International Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering (IJECE), vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 323-331, 2019.

[12] W. Su, et al., “Dual-Use of Modulation Recognition Techniques for Digital Communication Signals,” 2006 IEEE
Long Island Systems, Applications, and Technology Conference, LISAT, Long Island, NY, USA, pp. 1-6, 2006.

[13] A. Smith, et al., “Modulation Classification of Satellite Communication Signals Using Cumulants and Neural
Networks,’ Cognitive Communications for Aerospace Applications Workshop (CCAA), Cleveland, OH, USA,
pp. 1-8, 2017.

[14] K.E. Nolan, et al., “Modulation Scheme Classification for 4G Software Radio Wireless Networks,” International
Conference on Signal Processing, Pattern Recognition & Applications (SPPRA ’02), Crete Greece, pp. 25-31, 2002.

[15] A. Hazza, et al., “An Overview of Feature-Based Methods for Digital Modulation Classification,” 1st International
Conference on Communications, Signal Processing, and their Applications (ICCSPA), Sharjah, UAE, pp. 1-6, 2013.

[16] S.S. Hreshee, “Neural Network for Evolving and Optimizing Phased Array Antenna,” Proceedings of International
Conference on Control, Communication and Power Engineering, Bengaluru, India, pp. 514-519, 2013.

[17] K. Hassan, et al., “Automatic Modulation Recognition Using Wavelet Transform and Neural Networks in Wireless
Systems,” Eurasip Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, vol. 2010, pp. 1-13, 2010.

[18] S. S. Hreshee, “LMS Algorithm for Optimizing the Phased Array Antenna Radiation Pattern,’ Journal of
Telecommunications, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 20-24, 2013.

[19] X. Zhu and T Fuji, “A Modulation Classification Method in Cognitive Radios System Using Stacked Denoising
Sparse Autoencoder,” 2017 IEEE Radio and Wireless Symposium (RWS), Phoenix, AZ, USA, pp. 218-220, 2017.

[20] H. Kusuma, et al., “Deep Learning Based Facial Expressions Recognition System For Assisting Visually Impaired
Persons,” Bulletin of Electrical Engineering and Informatics, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1208-1219, 2020.

[21] J. Boiko, et al., “Signal Processing With Frequency And Phase Shift Keying Modulation in Telecommunications,”
TELKOMNIKA Telecommunication Computing Electronics and Control, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2025-2038, 2019.

[22] G. C. Cardarilli, et al, “Approximated Computing For Low Power Neural Networks,’ TELKOMNIKA
Telecommunication Computing Electronics and Control, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1236-1241, 2019.

Automatic recognition of the digital modulation types using the artificial neural networks (Saad S. Hreshee)
5882 O ISSN: 2088-8708

[23] M.J. Mohsin, et al., “Performance Analysis Of Image Transmission with Various Channel Conditions/Modulation
Techniques,’ TELKOMNIKA Telecommunication, Computing, Electronics and Control, vol. 18, no. 3,
pp. 1158-1168, 2020.

[24] R.J. Hasan and H. N. Abdullah, “Comparative Study of Selected Subcarrier Index Modulation OFDM Schemes,”
TELKOMNIKA Telecommunication Computing Electronics and Control, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 15-22, 2019.

[25] A. Sarkar, et al., “Multilayer Neural Network Synchronized Secured Session Key Based Encryption In Wireless
Communication,” Indonesian Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (IJEECS), vol. 14, no. 1,
pp. 169-177, 2019.

[26] T. A. Almohamad, et al., "Simultaneous Determination of Modulation Types and Signal-to-Noise Ratios Using
Feature-Based Approach," in IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 9262-9271, 2018, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS .2018.2809448.

[27] A. Dai, et al., “Automatic modulation classification using stacked sparse auto-encoders,’ 2016 TEEE 13th
International Conference on Signal Processing ICSP), Chengdu, pp. 248-252, 2016.

BIOGRAPHY OF AUTHOR

Asst. Prof. Dr. Saad Saffah Hasson Hreshee was born in Baghdad, Iraq, in 1974.
He received his BSc degree in Electrical Engineering from the Electrical Engineering
Department, College of Engineering, University of Babylon, Iraq, in 1997. He obtained his MSc
in Electronic Engineering from the Electrical and Electronic Engineering Department,
University of Technology, Iraq, in 2000, while his PhD. in Electronic and Communication
Engineering from the Electrical Engineering Department, College of Engineering, University of
Basrah, Iraq, in 2007. Since 2001, he has been with the staff of the Department of Electrical
Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Babylon, where he is now the head of
the electrical engineering department. His main research interests are antenna, signal processing,
encryption and communication security.

 

Int J Elec & Comp Eng, Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020 : 5871 - 5882
