Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13278-020-00696-x

REVIEW PAPER Mm)

Check for
updates

Deep learning for misinformation detection on online social networks:
a survey and new perspectives

Md Rafiqul Islam'® - Shaowu Liu' - Xianzhi Wang? - Guandong Xu!

Received: 28 March 2020 / Revised: 11 September 2020 / Accepted: 12 September 2020
© Springer-Verlag GmbH Austria, part of Springer Nature 2020

Abstract

Recently, the use of social networks such as Facebook, Twitter, and Sina Weibo has become an inseparable part of our daily
lives. It is considered as a convenient platform for users to share personal messages, pictures, and videos. However, while
people enjoy social networks, many deceptive activities such as fake news or rumors can mislead users into believing misin-
formation. Besides, spreading the massive amount of misinformation in social networks has become a global risk. Therefore,
misinformation detection (MID) in social networks has gained a great deal of attention and is considered an emerging area
of research interest. We find that several studies related to MID have been studied to new research problems and techniques.
While important, however, the automated detection of misinformation is difficult to accomplish as it requires the advanced
model to understand how related or unrelated the reported information is when compared to real information. The existing
studies have mainly focused on three broad categories of misinformation: false information, fake news, and rumor detec-
tion. Therefore, related to the previous issues, we present a comprehensive survey of automated misinformation detection
on (1) false information, (11) rumors, (111) spam, (iv) fake news, and (v) disinformation. We provide a state-of-the-art review
on MID where deep learning (DL) is used to automatically process data and create patterns to make decisions not only to
extract global features but also to achieve better results. We further show that DL is an effective and scalable technique for
the state-of-the-art MID. Finally, we suggest several open issues that currently limit real-world implementation and point to
future directions along this dimension.

Keywords Deep learning - Neural network - Misinformation detection - Decision making - Online social networks

1 Introduction

On online social networks such as Facebook!, Twitter’, and
Sina Weibo’, people share their opinions, videos, and news
on their various activities (Gao and Liu 2014; Islam et al.
2018a). While people enjoy social networks, many deceptive

b<] Guandong Xu
Guandong.Xu @uts.edu.au

Md Rafiqul Islam
MdRafiqul.Islam-1@student.uts.edu.au

Shaowu Liu
Shaowu.Liu @uts.edu.au

Xianzhi Wang

XIANZHI.WANG @uts.edu.au

Advanced Analytics Institute (AAi), University
of Technology Sydney (UTS), Sydney, Australia

School of Computer Science, University of Technology
Sydney (UTS), Sydney, Australia

Published online: 29 September 2020

activities such as fake news, or rumors can mislead users
into believing misinformation (Kumar et al. 2016). There-
fore, MID in social networks has gained a great deal of atten-
tion and is considered an emerging area of research inter-
est recently (Wu et al. 2019; Goswami and Kumar 2016).
However, the automated detection of misinformation 1s dif-
ficult to accomplish as it requires the advanced model to
understand how related or unrelated the reported informa-
tion is when compared to real information (Wu et al. 2019).
Also, to solve many complex MID problems, academia and
industry researchers have applied DL to a large number of
applications to make decisions (Xu et al. 2019; Yenala et al.
2018; Yin et al. 2020). Therefore, this survey seeks to pro-
vide such a systematic review of current research on MID
based on DL techniques.

 https://www.facebook.com/
2 https://twitter.com/
3 https://weibo.com/

Q) Springer
82 Page 2 of 20

Fig. 1 Social relationships
between different users

 

ShannonShorr

scott_seiver

 

SavagePoker

 
   

 

er WhoJedi
ToddBrunson
{Wie
AFeldmanESPN

Social network (SN) sites are a dynamic platform that
is now being utilized for different purposes such as educa-
tion, business, medical purposes, telemarketing, but also,
unfortunately, unlawful activities (Vartapetiance and Gil-
lam 2014; Wu et al. 2019; Naseem et al. 2020). Generally,
people use SN to socialize with their interested friends
and colleagues. Additionally, it is utilized as a channel to
speak with clients, and its information can be valuable for
identifying new patterns in business insights (Bindu et al.
2017). Figure | illustrates the rapid information exchange
between users regardless of their location. For example, on
online social media, businesses share their product market-
ing, organizations share their daily activities, celebrities
share news on their various activities, and government bod-
ies share information on their various responsibilities. As
a result, businesses can offer discounts on their products
based on observations of current market demand, customer
feedback, etc. Besides, they have realized that online mar-
keting is spreading faster than manual marketing (Acquisti
and Gross 2009; Tsui 2017; Nguyen et al. 2017a; Quah and
Sriganesh 2008). Similarly, celebrities use SN to increase
their public exposure, and the government uses it to collect
public opinions. However, it also opens the door for unlaw-
ful activities which harm society, business markets, health-
care systems, etc. where incorrect or misleading informa-
tion is intentionally or unintentionally spread (Bharti et al.
2017; Sun et al. 2018; Gao and Liu 2014). Therefore, SN has
attracted a lot of attention and is considered to be a devel-
oping interdisciplinary research area that aims to analyze,
combine, explore, and adjust techniques to investigate SN
data globally. Although existing studies might consider the

D) Springer

@ ~s

devopoker

:
\

i ae
@& Poker_Prod

   
  

Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82

Rvs
w
é

RealKidPoker

  

MattGlantz

KristyArnett

.- i

 

=

©

AgentMarco

     

eee) bar a
ne.

s

PokerNews

concept of misinformation in a different view, we consider
MID in social media is a timely matter of concern (Sharma
et al. 2019; Shu et al. 2020).

Misinformation is inaccurate information which is created
to misguide the readers (Fernandez and Alani 2018; Zhang
et al. 2018a). There are numerous terms related to misinfor-
mation including fake news, rumors, spam, and disinforma-
tion, which usually contain numerical, categorical, textual,
image, etc., data and used to initiate terrible outcomes (Ma
et al. 2016; Bharti et al. 2017; Helmstetter and Paulheim
2018). Due to the high dependency on social media, many
dishonest people get a chance to spread misinformation via
a false account (Kumar and Shah 2018; Shu et al. 2019c).
Additionally, the information they provide is well written,
long, and well referenced. So, the readers trust their activi-
ties. However, the spread of misinformation will be ineffec-
tive if people can identify the different types of misbehavior
including fake reviews, false information, and rumors. And,
identifying misinformation using SN data may provide early
feedback on emerging issues, such as stock movement, polit-
ical gossip, social issues, and business performance (Habib
et al. 2019). In this regard, various techniques have been
applied to differentiate genuine and fraudulent information
or users over the past years (Islam et al. 2018a; De Choud-
hury et al. 2013a; De Choudhury et al. 2013b). However, it
is very difficult for traditional methods to analyze all these
types of misinformation. Therefore, deep learning-based
detection approaches can be designed to fit various types of
features for MID.

The development of machine learning (ML) and DL
techniques have attracted significant attention for different

 
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82

purposes both from industry and research communities
(LeCun et al. 2015; Islam et al. 2019). In particular, DL-
based detection approaches have become a major source of
MID. For example, a large volume of research works have
explored on automatic MID (Jain et al. 2016; Qazvinian
et al. 2011; Zhang et al. 2016), as well as related terms, e.g.,
rumor (Sampson et al. 2016; Wu et al. 2017), fake informa-
tion (Kwon et al. 2017; Ma et al. 2016; Ruchansky et al.
2017; Shu et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2017), and spam detection
(Hu et al. 2013; Yin et al. 2018; Li and Liu 2018; Markines
et al. 2009; Wang et al. 2011). Therefore, the success of DL
for MID both in academia and industry requires a system-
atic review to better understand the scenarios of the existing
problem and current research issues. Although there have
been attempts to review and summarize the literature on
MID in a very nice way, there are still enough spaces to
review the literature on misinformation in a broader way.
For example, in an existing survey, Shu et al. (2017) shows
a fascinating association between psychological concept,
fake news, and social network with data mining techniques.
The literature surveyed by Zubiaga et al. (2018), Yu et al.
(2017b), and Zhang et al. (2015) illustrates a related prob-
lem of rumor detection, where they differentiate between
unverified and verified information, wherein the unveri-
fied information may remain unresolved or may turn out
to be true or false. Additionally, Kumar and Shah (2018)
addressed a broader scope of false information on the web
which presents the existing work, current progress, and
future directions together. However, from the existing stud-
ies, we find that (1) there is no clear boundary definition
between misinformation, disinformation, and false infor-
mation, and (2) there are no DL method-based systematic
reviews on MID whether different types of misinformation
problems have been summarized under each DL technique.
We wish to emphasize that misinformation is getting more
and more complex, making the conventional machine learn-
ing techniques incapable of detecting them. For example,
due to the recent advances in large-scale pre-trained models
(e.g., BERT, GPT-3) and adversarial learning, programs
can generate misinformation in an automated and difficult
to detect manner. This calls for the need of using high capac-
ity models, such as DL. Therefore, although existing reviews
are important in their own right, much like the detection of
scam email (Saberi et al. 2007), fake followers (Cresci et al.
2015), or false web links (Lake 2014), we decide to focus
on MID to provide detailed discussions of DL techniques
and their limitations.

The existing surveys covered a broad range of techniques
used for MID. However, given the increasing popularity of
using DL methods to detect misinformation, we believe our
survey provides a timely review of the use of DL techniques.
For example, we reviewed how different MID problems
are covered under various DL techniques, which were not

Page3o0f20 82

covered in existing surveys. We hope this survey can benefit
researchers to deep insight between related techniques and
these issues. Moreover, despite the promising outcomes of
DL techniques, we focus on some open issues such as data
volume, data quality, explainability, domain complexity,
interpretability, feature enrichment, model privacy, incor-
porating expert knowledge, and temporal modeling, which
are necessary to understand the advances in this domain.
In summary, the main contributions of our survey are as
follows:

e We present a state-of-the-art systematic review of the
existing problems, solutions, and validation of MID in
online social networks based on various DL techniques.

e To identify the recent and future trends of MID research,
we analyze the key strengths and limitations of the exist-
ing various techniques and describe the state-of-the-art
DL as an emerging technique on massive social network
data.

e We provide some open issues that contribute to this new
exciting field based on DL techniques.

In the rest of the paper, first, we present the MID with the
formal problem definition, types, impacts, and DL with the
associated challenges. We then present the state-of-the-art
DL techniques for MID. Further, to encourage researchers
with rigorous evaluation and comparison, we include a list
of open issues that outline promising directions for future
research. Finally, we present the conclusion.

2 Background
2.1 Misinformation detection

In this section, we discuss the formal definition of misinfor-
mation, types, and its impact on SN. But we do not discuss
in this section how to undertake MID, what techniques are
used, and what techniques are effective. The introduction of
this paper has shown that DL is now an emerging technique
that plays a critical role in MID. As our main task is to
review the learning process of DL for MID, in the follow-
ing sections, we discuss the importance of DL for MID,
overview its existing performance, and provide some open
issues to work in the future.

2.1.1 What is misinformation?

Misinformation 1s a false statement to lead people astray by
hiding the correct facts. It is also referred to as deception,
ambiguity, falsehoods, etc. (Zhang et al. 2016). It generates
feelings of mistrust that subsequently weaken relationships,
which is a negative violation of expectations (Wu et al.

Q) Springer
82 Page 4 of 20

False Info Rumor Spam
“the. , ae

f
4
_

Misinformation

Fake News Disinformation

Fig.2 Key types related to misinformation

2019; Ma et al. 2018). Additionally, people do not expect to
receive misinformation from their close friends, relatives, or
strangers. Instead, they expect truthful communication. For
example, some people were involved in a Facebook discus-
sion on a recently published product where there are both
fake users and real users. The real users discuss the product’s
features honestly. However, fake users praise the product
regardless of their true opinion.

Problem definition Suppose you have been given a res-
taurant review of E among N users to analyze user feedback
a, which contains both genuine feedback and false reviews
created by restaurant owners. It is very difficult to distin-
guish the false review from the true ones. Therefore, the
researcher’s role is to identify the real and false reviews.

1, if ais false
F(a) = { 0, otherwise (1)

According to Wu et al. (2019), in the following section, we
provide five major terms related to MID, namely rumor, fake
news, false information, spam, and disinformation as shown
in Fig. 2. We then describe a brief literature review of exist-
ing DL techniques for MID in Sect.3.

2.1.2 Types of misinformation

There are many terms related to misinformation such as
rumor, fake news, false information, spam, and disinforma-
tion. Rumor is a story of circulating information from person
to person whose veracity status is doubtful (Lin et al. 2019).
Fake news is a news article that intentionally misleads the
readers, and it is verifiably false (Shu et al. 2018). Misin-
formation can be broadly used to treat information as False
information (Kumar and Shah 2018). Spam can be referred
as an unsolicited message which sends over the internet for
spreading malware, advertising, etc. (Rayana and Akoglu
2015; Hu et al. 2013). Disinformation is a piece of inac-
curate information that is spread intentionally to mislead

Q) Springer

Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82

people (Galitsky 2015). Although misinformation and dis-
information both refer to incorrect/false information, a big
difference between them lies in the intention - without the
intent misinformation is spread to deceive while disinforma-
tion is spread with the intent (Kumar et al. 2016; Hernon
1995; Fallis 2014). Several studies have been forwarded for
misinformation identification on social media (Kumar and
Shah 2018; Wu et al. 2019). Some works treat a microblog
post an object, obtain the credibility of the post, and aggre-
gate to the event level (Jin et al. 2017a), (Jindal et al.), (Qaz-
vinian et al. 2011; Gupta et al. 2013). Additionally, some
work extracts various features from the event level and iden-
tifies whether an event belongs to misinformation (Kwon
et al. 2017; Ma et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2016). Moreover,
some other works extract more effective hand-crafted fea-
tures, including conflict viewpoints (Jin et al. 2017c), tem-
poral properties (Kwon et al. 2017; Ma et al. 2019), users’
feedback (Shu et al. 2020), and signals tweets containing
skepticism (Zhao et al. 2015). Therefore, to better under-
stand misinformation in social media, Fig. 2 illustrates the
five related terms of misinformation such as false informa-
tion, rumors, fake news, spam, and disinformation. In this
section, we define and describe each type of misinformation,
respectively.

False information False information is a broader con-
cept of misinformation. Intentionally, it is interchangeably
used to define as a correct information. In social networks,
some unscrupulous people exploit this for their interests
by ensuring that the basic patterns of the original informa-
tion are correct (Kumar and Shah 2018; Habib et al. 2019).
For example, we generally expect honest users to provide
positive reviews to good products and negative reviews to
bad products, whereas dishonest users may not follow this
behavior. Existing studies estimated that 20% of the reviews
on Yelp are fake (Donfro 2013). This large number of fake
reviews, which are getting more and more difficult to detect,
call for the use of advanced DL techniques to extract mean-
ingful features and to identify the review as fake or real
accurately.

Rumor A rumor is a story of doubtful truth that is easy
to spread widely online (Zubiaga et al. 2017). The rumor is
spread by dishonest business people for their benefit (Zubi-
aga et al. 2018, 2016b). For example, a rumor spreads on
social media that recently the price of salt and onion had
increased in Bangladesh and some shops quickly increased
their prices*, °. In this regard, some people purchased more
of these products than they needed. Additionally, Fig. 3
depicts an interesting rumor campaign about “Saudi Ara-
bia’s first female robot citizen beheaded,” which shows how

* https://www.thedailystar.net/country/rumour-salt-price-raising-
spreads-among-consumers- 1829260

> https://www.dhakatribune.com/business/2019/11/19/rumour-drive
s-groceries-out-of-salt-stock-across-country
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82

Fig.3 Sample responses to a
rumor claim. Figure courtesy by
Ma et al. (2019)

@ il

  

 

Robot citizens in Saudi was reduced back to zero. A female Robot
named Sophia was beheaded in a public square in Riyadh!

lhe Muslims is Saudi Arabia killed their first Robot citizen
in the street. They beheaded the robot which shows tt...

Page5of20 82

 
  
 
 

   

Palio I y
roliowenec on TW. :p They ee

  
    
   
   

Remember #sophiatherahot ? KSA just heheaded the robot.

PS: Saudi Arabia previously made Sophia a citizen!

 

popular index patterns are overwhelmed by propaganda
terms expressing doubts and disagreements like “‘fake news.”

Fake news Fake news is a modified version of an original
news story which is spread intentionally and very difficult
to identify (Cui et al. 2019). It mimics traditional news and
spreads easily on social media, reaches a large number of
people quickly, and deceives many (Kumar et al. 2019; Shu
et al. 2017).

Spam Spam is an unwanted message that generally con-
tains irrelevant or inappropriate information to mislead users
(Yilmaz and Durahim 2018). It is difficult to distinguish
spam from real messages, as spammers hack users’ infor-
mation (Citlak et al. 2019).

Disinformation Disinformation is a subset of misin-
formation, which is false or misleading information. It is
intentionally spread online to deceive others, and its impact
has continued to grow (Hernon 1995; Galitsky 2015). Mis-
information is conveyed in the honest but mistaken belief
that the relayed incorrect facts are true. However, disinfor-
mation defines false facts that are conceived to deliberately
deceive an audience. One recent disinformation example is
pure alcohol that can cure the coronavirus infections during

the COVID-19 pandemic situation. However, pure alcohol
can be very harmful to the human body’, ’.

In summary, we compare the five related terms of mis-
information as shown in Table 1. For example, on charac-
teristics, disinformation provides misleading features that
also have a specific objective. Additionally, different types
of misinformation have different categories of side effects.
On integrity, we use sure and not sure levels to evaluate five
different types of misinformation.

2.1.3 Impact of misinformation

Misinformation can affect every aspect of life such as
the social, political, economic, stock market, emergency
response during natural disasters, and crisis events. It aims
to intentionally or unintentionally mislead public opinions,
influence political elections, and threaten public security and
social stability (Wu et al. 2019). Most of the time, it reveals
fabricated information related to fictional issues rather than

© https://ec.europa.eu/info/live-work-travel-eu/health/coronaviru
s-response/fighting-disinformation/tackling-coronavirus-disinforma
tion-en

’ https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/disinformation-and-
coronavirus

D) Springer
82 Page 6 of 20

Table 1 Comparison

Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82

of different types of Type Characteristics Objectiveness Severity Integrity References
misinformation Rumors Ambiguous Not sure Low Not sure Shu et al. (2020)
False information Deception Yes High False Kumar and Shah
(2018)
Fake news Misguided Yes Medium False Sharma et al. (2019)
Spam Confused Yes Low Not sure Citlak et al. (2019)
Disinformation Mislead/deceive Yes Medium False Guo et al. (2019)

relevant information (Fernandez and Alani 2018). Nowa-
days, it has become easier to spread misinformation quickly
due to social network platforms such as Facebook, Twitter,
and Sina Weibo. In particular, when people engage in con-
versation, one can share information that is stated to be fac-
tual but that may not always be true. Additionally, fraudulent
users share misleading information to look for personal gain
in some way. For example, concerning political issues, some
view being a misled resident as more regrettable than being
an uninformed resident. Misguided residents express their
opinions with certainty and thus influence in elections. This
kind of deception originates from speakers not continually
being forthright and clear.

With the advent of SN and technological advances around
the world, there has been a great explosion of misinforma-
tion (Kumar et al. 2016; Sharma et al. 2019; Goswami and
Kumar 2016). In the last few decades, several studies have
been conducted to measure the impact of misinformation
such as rumors, fake reviews, and fake news. For example,
Friggeri et al. (2014) studied the spread of rumors on Face-
book, and (Willmore) analyzed the use of fake election news
articles on Facebook. Another work by Zubiaga et al. (2018)
discussed how rumors spread quickly on social media (Twit-
ter) and how this is becoming a threat to many people. They
stated that misinformation has a significant negative impact
on the workplace and daily life. For example, an organiza-
tion can undermine reliable evidence through a purposeful
deception campaign. In detail, tobacco companies utilized
falsehood in half of the twentieth century to diminish the
reliability of studies that showed the connection between
smoking and lung disease (Brandt 2012). In the clinical
field, misinformation can quickly prompt life endangerment
as found in the case of the public’s negative observation
toward vaccines to treat diseases.

Overall, in the context of misinformation, existing stud-
ies focus on the text content mostly, whereas a few of them
investigated image/video content (Jin et al. 2016; Gupta
et al. 2014). Although many techniques used for MID, all the
approaches have not been proved effective yet (Zhang et al.
2016; Shu et al. 2017). Additionally, existing approaches
have some challenges for MID, e.g. data volume, data qual-
ity, domain complexity, interpretability, feature enrichment,
model privacy, incorporating expert knowledge, temporal

Q) Springer

modeling, dynamic, etc. (Liu and Xu 2016; Ma et al. 2015).
Therefore, we attempt to introduce DL as an emerging state-
of-the-art technique for MID.

2.2 Deep learning

The term deep learning (DL) was first introduced to the
machine learning community by Dechter (1986) and to artifi-
cial neural networks based on a Boolean threshold by Aizen-
berg (1999). In the field of ML in artificial intelligence, DL is
an emerging technique which is used in various applications
including computer vision (Wang and Yeung 2013), speech
recognition (Hinton et al. 2012), natural language process-
ing (Young et al. 2018), anomaly detection (Du et al. 2017),
portfolio optimization (Vo et al. 2019), healthcare monitor-
ing (Islam et al. 2018b), personality mining (Vo et al. 2018),
novelty detection in robot behavior, traffic monitoring, visual
data processing, social network analysis, etc. Nowadays, it is
becoming increasingly used for processing data and creating
patterns to assist the decision-making process. Furthermore,
this state-of-the-art method helps to improve learning execu-
tion, expand the scope of the research area, and simplify the
measuring procedure.

Over the few decades, various techniques have been
proposed to solve many problems (fake news, misinforma-
tion, anomaly detection, etc.) in the online social network.
Researchers are constantly finding and investigating research
gaps in various domains and attempting to solve these prob-
lems using various techniques. Deep learning is one such tech-
nique and has become increasingly popular, being explored in
a large number of domains with various neural networks such
as convolutional neural networks (CNN) (Abdel-Hamid et al.
2014; Kim 2014), recurrent neural networks (RNN) (Cho
et al. 2014b; Li and Wu 2015), and long short-term memory
(LSTM) (Sun et al. 2018), which are introduced to help other
researchers explore their knowledge in different applications.

Deep learning serves as the key to performing complex
tasks of higher levels of sophistication. However, to success-
fully build and deploy them proves to be a challenge for data
scientists and engineers all over the world (Liu and Wu 2020;
Hardy et al. 2016). Although data training takes a little longer,
testing can be done in a very short time. To accelerate DL
processing, DL frameworks combine the implementation of
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82

Table 2 List of popular deep learning framework

Framework Key Point

Caffe Caffe is one of the most popular deep learning

network

Torch Because of using the fast scripting language C/C++
LuaJIT, torch provides faster performance

than other frameworks

PyTorch PyTorch is a port to torch deep learning

framework

Python

DL4j DL4j uses for text-mining, NLP, and image

recognition

Neon Neon is designed to ease of use and for exten-

sibility

Python

TensorFlow ‘TensorFlow is one of the best deep learning
frameworks for natural language processing,
speech recognition, image processing

Keras Keras is a part of the TensorFlow core API and
uses for text generation, summarization, and

classification

Python

CNTK To train deep learning models, CNTK is an
open-source deep learning framework for for

image, speech, and text-based data

Theano Theano allows users to define, optimize, and
evaluate mathematical expressions on arrays
and tensors

Dlib

Dlib is an independent cross-platform open C++

source software

Torch Torch is a machine learning open source soft- CC
ware library which provides a large number
of algorithms for deep learning

BigDL It is a distributed deep learning based frame-

work

Python

modularized DL algorithms, optimization techniques, distri-
bution techniques, and support to infrastructures (Chalapa-
thy and Chawla 2019; David and Netanyahu 2015). They are
developed to simplify the implementation process and boost
system-level development and research. Table 2 shows some
popular DL frameworks such as Caffe, Torch, TensorFlow,
MXNet, and CNTK, which allow researchers to develop tools
and can offer a better level of abstraction and simplify difficult
programming challenges. Each framework is built differently
for different purposes. It can be observed from Table 2 that
most of the frameworks are implemented in Python, which is
the most common language for DL architecture design. It can
make programming more efficient and easier by simplifying
the programming process.

3 Deep learning for misinformation
detection: state-of-the-art

Misinformation detection is defined as an observation
that deviates greatly from other observations and thereby
arouses suspicion that it was generated by a different

Interface Support

C, C++, Python, MATLAB Yes

Java, Scala, and JVM Yes

Python, C++ and R Yes

Python, C++ Yes

C, Python

Page7of20 82

CNN/RNN Support References

Jia et al. (2014)

Yes Collobert et al. (2002)

Yes Ketkar (2017)
Parvat et al. (2017)
Yes Pouyanfar et al. (2018)

Abadi et al. (2015)

Yes Chollet (2018)

Shi et al. (2018)

Yes Van Merriénboer et al. (2015)

CNN-Yes RNN-No_ King (2009)

Yes Collobert et al. (2011)

Yes Dai et al. (2019)

mechanism. In Sect. 2.1.2, we have discussed differ-
ent terms related to misinformation with examples. It is
observed that the same type of problem has been solved
by many techniques. Although many techniques are being
used to detect misinformation in social network data,
DL is one of the better approaches to use. However, the
same type of misinformation problems has been solved
with various DL techniques (Table 3). Additionally, these
types of DL techniques are dependent on different data
characteristics and used to automatically identify misin-
formation. Therefore, we have divided the DL techniques
into three main categories based on the model as follows:
(1) discriminative models, (2) generative models, and (3)
hybrid models. All three categories have a large number
of architectural models that are commonly used for MID.
However, due to differences in performance, we only dis-
cussed 12 models namely convolutional neural networks
(CNN), recurrent neural networks (RNN), recursive neural
networks (RVNN), restricted Boltzmann machines (RBM),
deep Boltzmann machines (DBM), deep belief networks
(DBN), variational autoencoders (VAE), convolutional
restricted Boltzmann machines (CRBM), convolutional

Q) Springer
82 Page 8 of 20

Table 3 Deep learning methods showing the performances within the applications of social network research

Social Network Analysis and Mining

Models Input Data User Response Problem Tackled

Text Visual
CNN+LSTM Jv Jv Disinformation detection
LSTM+BiLSTM Jv False claim detection
RCNN Jv False information detection
BiLSTM J J Misinformation detection
RNN+ GRU Jv Jv Fake news detection
CNN-+Attention J J Review spam detection
CNN+LSTM o Spam detection
LSTM+Attention o o Early rumor detection
Attention J J Misinformation identification
LSTM-+Attention Jv Jv Fake news detection
RNN Jv Jv Fake news detection
CNN Jv Jv Misinformation identification
LSTM-+Attention Jv Jv Rumor detection
RNN Jv Jv Rumor detection
GRU Jv Jv Rumor detection
CNN+GRU o Early detection of fake news
RNN Jv Jv Rumor detection
CNN+LSTM Jv Jv Rumor detection

Fig.4 Classification of deep

learning models

   

Recursive Neural
Network (RvNN)

/ Deep Learning \

}
/

Techniques

_,| Restricted Boltzmann
Machine (RBM)

be Deep Belief
Network (DBN)

ae Deep Boltzmann
Machine (DBM)

 

 

recurrent neural networks (CRNN), ensemble-based
fusion (EBP), and long short-term memory (LSTM), as
shown in Fig. 4. We discuss each model that uses for MID,
respectively.

misinformation

(2020) 10:82

References

Dhamani et al. (2019)
Popat et al. (2018)

Wu et al. (2018)

Zhang et al. (2019)

Shu et al. (2019a)
Gong et al. (2020)
Shahariar et al. (2019)
Chen et al. (2018)

Liu et al. (2018)

Popat et al. (2018)
Ruchansky et al. (2017)
Jia et al. (2016), Yu et al. (2017a)
Guo et al. (2018)

Jin et al. (2017b)

Li et al. (2018a)

Liu and Wu (2018)

Ma et al. (2016)
Nguyen et al. (2017b)

   
   
    
      
    

Hybrid Model

Convolutional Restricted
Boltzmann Machme

Convolutional Recurrent
Neural Network

Ensemble Based
Fusion

3.1 Discriminative model for detecting

A variety of discriminative models used social content and

context-based features for MID. In recent years, to tackle
the problem of misinformation, several studies have been
conducted and revealed some promising preliminary results.
Therefore, we briefly review the three discriminative models

D) Springer
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82

Fig.5 RNN architecture used
for fake news detection. Figure
courtesy by Shu et al. (2019a)

Fake News
Prediction

Sentence-Comment

Co-attention

Sentence Encoder

Word Encoder

namely CNN, RNN, and RVNN, respectively. It is noted that
the discriminative-based models have demonstrated signifi-
cant advances in text classification and analysis.
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) CNN is one of
the most popular and widely used models for the state-of-
the-art of many computer vision tasks (LeCun et al. 2010).
However, recently, it has been extensively applied in the
NLP community as well (Jacovi et al. 2018). For example,
Chen et al. (2017) introduced a convolutional neural net-
work-based classification method with single and multi-word
embedding for identifying both rumor and stance tweets.
Kumar et al. (2019) introduced both a CNN and a bidirec-
tional LSTM ensembled network with an attention mecha-
nism to solve MID. Additionally, Yang et al. (2018) stated
that online social media is continually growing in popularity
and genuine users are being attacked by many fraudulent
users. They informed that fake news is written to intention-
ally mislead users. In their paper, they applied the TI-CNN
model to identify the explicit and latent features from the
text and image information. They demonstrated that their
model solves the fake news detection problem effectively.
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) RNN utilizes the
sequential information in the network which is essential
in many applications where the embedded structure in the
data sequence conveys useful knowledge (Alkhodair et al.
2020). The advantage of RNN is its ability to better capture

Page9of20 82

    

Japooug syuawwo;)

contextual information. To detect rumors, existing meth-
ods rely on handcrafted features to employ machine learn-
ing algorithms that require a huge manual effort. To guard
against this issue, the earliest adoption of RNNs for rumor
detection is reported in Ma et al. (2016) and recurrent neural
networks with attention mechanism in Chen et al. (2018) and
Jin et al. (2017b). Figure 5 shows the RNN architecture used
for the fake news detection proposed by (Shu et al. 2019a).
Authors have proposed different RNN architectures, namely
tanh-RNN, LSTM and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) (Cho
et al. 2014a). Among the proposed architectures, GRU has
obtained the best results in both the datasets considered,
with 0.88 and 0.91 accuracy, respectively. Ma et al. (2016)
proposed a RNN model to learn and that captures variations
in relevant information in posts over time. Additionally, they
described that RNN utilizes the sequential information in the
network where the embedded structure in the data sequence
conveys useful knowledge. They demonstrated that their
proposed model can capture more data from hidden layers
which give better results than the other models.

Recursive Neural Network (RVNN) Researchers are more
concerned to identify unscrupulous users in SN and want to
protect genuine users from fraudulent behavior (Guo et al.
2019). Therefore, RVNN is one of the most widely used and
successful networks for many natural language processing
(NLP) tasks (Socher et al. 2013; Zubiaga et al. 2016a). This

D) Springer
82 Page 10 of 20

 

’ ‘ ‘ ’
Output Sequence x4 x2 x3 xr
,
Hidden Layer Ay > he a > hr > hy > he a >hr—y
[ |
. LE 1 L-™> ; ; ;
Input Sequence (x1) (2) ees (xr ) > xt (ah won ges

GRU Encoder GRU Decoder

Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82

Reconstruction Module

 

Reconstruction Module Adversarial Learning Module Lrec(Xp Xp)

Fig.6 The architecture of the generative adversarial learning model. Figure courtesy by Ma et al. (2019)

architecture processes objects that can make predictions in
a hierarchical structure and classifies the outputs using com-
positional vectors. To reproduce the patterns of the input
layer to the output layer, this network is trained by auto-
association. Also, this model analyzes a text word by word
and stores the semantics of all the previous texts in a fixed-
sized hidden layer (Cho et al. 2014b). For instance, Zubiaga
et al. (2016b) proposed a RVNN architecture for handling
the input of different modalities. Ma et al. (2018) proposed a
model that collects tweets from Twitter and extracts features
from discriminating information. It follows a non-sequential
pattern to present a more robust identification of the various
types of rumour-related content structures.

3.2 Generative model for detecting misinformation

Over the last few decades, online social media platforms
have become the main target space of deceptive opinions
where deceptive opinions (such as rumor, spam, troll, fake
news) are deliberately written to sound authentic. Several
existing works for MID are based on syntactic and lexical
patterns or features of opinion. Therefore, in this section, the
successful use of five generative models on various classifi-
cation applications, namely RBM, DBN, DBM, GAN, and
VAE are discussed.

Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) RBM is a gen-
erative stochastic artificial neural network. It can learn a
probability distribution over its set of inputs (Liao et al.
2016). Although learning is impractical in general Boltz-
mann machines, it can be quite efficient in an architecture
called the restricted Boltzmann machine. However, it does
not allow intra-layer connections between hidden units (Papa
et al. 2015). Therefore, this method of stacking RBMs makes
it possible to train many layers of hidden units efficiently.
RBMs have been applied in various applications, but very
few works have been addressed in the context of MID.
However, in the last few decades, researchers are attempt-
ing to fit this method to identify fake, rumour, spam, etc.
on social media platforms. For instance, Da Silva et al.
(2018), da Silva et al. (2016), and Silva et al. (2015) applied
RBMs to automatically extract the features related to spam
detection.

Q) Springer

Deep Belief Network (DBN) DBN 1s a generative graphi-
cal model composed of multiple layers of latent variables
(hidden units). It connects between the layers but not
between units within each layer. DBNs can be viewed as
a composition of simple, unsupervised networks such as
restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) or autoencoders,
where each subnetwork’s hidden layer serves as the vis-
ible layer for the next. There are already many works that
have used this network (Li et al. 2018b; Yepes et al. 2014;
Alom et al. 2015; Selvaganapathy et al. 2018). For example,
Tzortzis and Likas (2007) stated that spam is an unexpected
message which contains inappropriate information and first
applied to fit DBNs for spam detection. In another paper,
Wei et al. (2018) proposed a DBN-based method to identify
false data injection attacks in the smart grid. They demon-
strated that the DBN-based method achieves a better result
than the traditional SVM-based approach.

Deep Boltzmann Machine (DBM) DBM 1s a type of
binary pair-wise markov random field with multiple layers
of hidden random variables. This is a network of symmetri-
cally coupled stochastic binary units which have been used
to detect malicious activities (Zhang et al. 2012; Dandekar
et al. 2017). For example, Jindal et al. used a multimodal
benchmark dataset for fake news detection. They presented
results from a Deep Boltzmann Machine-based multimodal
DL model (Srivastava and Salakhutdinov 2012). Zhang et al.
(2012) generated a model based on DBMs to detect spoken
queries. They presented that their proposed method achieved
10.3% improvement compared to that with the previous
Gaussian model.

Generative Adverserial Network (GAN) GAN 1s a class
of ML systems (Goodfellow et al. 2014). Given a training
set, this technique learns to generate new data with the same
Statistics as the training set. When considering earlier stud-
ies, we see that the widespread rumors usually result from
the deliberate dissemination of information which is gener-
ally aimed at forming a consensus on rumor news events.
Maet al. (2019) proposed a generative adversarial network
model to make automated rumor detection more robust and
efficient and is designed to identify powerful features related
to uncertain or conflicting voice production and rumors. Fig-
ure 6 illustrates the structure of a deep generative adversarial
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82

 

 

 

 

| Capture
| Vi
| hy, , - hr. J
J L - J W,

a
we] .. fw] |. [ow] 7
W a W a W a | Ni Integrate
| my Xt Xr

Score

   

Pagellof20 82

Capture

Fig.7 An illustration of the hybrid model. Figure courtesy by Ruchansky et al. (2017)

learning model for rumors detection proposed by Ma et al.
(2019).

Variational Autoencoder (VAE) VAE models make strong
assumptions concerning the distribution of latent variables.
The use of a variational approach for latent representation
learning results in an additional loss component and a spe-
cific estimator for the training algorithm called the stochas-
tic gradient variational bayes (SGVB) estimator. Qian et al.
(2018) proposed a generative conditional VAE model to
extract new patterns by analyzing a user’s past meaningful
responses on true and false news articles and played a vital
role in detecting misinformation on social media. Wu et al.
(2017) explored whether the knowledge from the histori-
cal data analysis can benefit rumor detection. The result of
their study was that similar rumors always produce the same
behaviors.

3.3 Hybrid model for detecting misinformation

The tasks of detecting misinformation (such as fake news,
rumor, spam, troll, false information, and disinformation)
have been made in a variety of ways. A lot of research works
have been done using various DL models separately. How-
ever, to increase the performance of individual models, the
need for hybrid models are immense. Therefore, over the last
few decades, hybrid DL has been considered an emerging
technique for various purposes. In this section, we review
some related works on MID based on the deep hybrid model.
The hybrid model consists of CRBM, CRNN, EBF, and
LSTM.

Convolutional Recurrent Neural Network (CRNN) Cur-
rently, researchers are increasingly focusing on applying
CNN and RNN models in a hybrid way to achieve better
performance in various applications. They argue that real-
world data are structured sequences, with spatio-temporal
sequences. For example, several works utilized a blend of

CNN and RNN such as spatial and temporal regularities
(Lin et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019). Their
models can process time-shifting visual contributions for
variable length expectations. These neural network archi-
tectures combine a CNN for visual element extraction
with an RNN for grouping learning. Besides, such models
have been effectively utilized for fake news, rumor, false
information, and spammer detection. For example, to iden-
tify rumor for events on social media platform, Lin et al.
(2019) proposed a novel rumor detection method based
on a hierarchical recurrent convolutional neural network.
They use the RCNN model to learn contextual informa-
tion and utilize the bidirectional GRU network to learn
time period information. Figure 7 shows the structure of
a deep hybrid model for fake news detection proposed
by Ruchansky et al. (2017). Xu et al. (2019) proposed a
CRNN model to extract data from textual overlays, for
example, captions, key ideas, or scene level summaries for
rumor detection on Sina Weibo. They proposed this CRNN
model to create training data intended for textual over-
lays regularly occurring in the online sina weibo platform.
Zhang et al. (2018c) proposed an approach called decep-
tive review identification by recurrent convolutional neural
network (DRI-RCNN) to identify the deceptive review of
the content. They compared the neural network approaches
(RvVNN, LB-SVM, CNN, and RCNN, GRNN) to the
widely used conventional strategies. Their experimental
results demonstrated that the neural network approaches
outperform the conventional techniques for all datasets.
Convolutional Restricted Boltzman Machine (CRBM) An
extension of the RBM model, called the convolutional RBM
(CRBM), was developed by Norouzi (2009). He informed
that CRBM, like the RBM, is a two-layer model in which
visible and hidden arbitrary factors are organized as matri-
ces. He proposed a way to make a Boltzmann machine and
convolutional limited Boltzmann machine, forming a deep

Q) Springer
82 Page 12 of 20

network to improve its presentation for both image process-
ing and feature extraction. He also provided a simple and
intuitive training method that jointly optimizes all RBMs
in the network, which works well in practice. For instance,
Norouzi et al. (2009) proposed a CRBM model for learning
features specific to an object class. In which associations
are nearby and loads are shared with the spatial structure
of pictures and stack them over one another to construct
a multilayer progressive system of exchanging, separating,
and pooling.

Ensemble-Based Fusion To study profile information,
Wang (2017) proposed a hybrid model where he used
speaker profiles as a part of the input data. He also made
the first large-scale fake news detection benchmark dataset
with speaker details information such as location of speech,
party affiliation, job title, credit history, as well as topic.
Tschiatschek et al. (2018) investigated the vital problem
of leveraging crowd signals to detect fake news. They ana-
lyzed user’s flagging behaviors and applied novel algorithms
detective to perform Bayesian inference to detect fake news.
Their experiments performed well in identifying a genuine
user’s flagging behavior. Zhang et al. (2018b) explored a
new idea to detect fake news on social media. They iden-
tified some deceptive words which can be used by these
online fake users and harm offline society. Shu et al. (2018)
discussed that social media has become a popular network
for sharing misinformation and presented FakeNewsNet as
fake news data respiratory for further analysis. Roy et al.
(2018) presented misinformation and applied many various
DL techniques such as CNN, Bi-LSTM, and MLP to detect
fake news. They claimed that the rate of misinformation is
increasing rapidly.

LSTM Density Mixture Model Although traditional meth-
ods have used lexical features to detect fake news automati-
cally, the hybrid deep neural network has received a lot of
attention globally. For example, Ruchansky et al. (2017)
stated that fake news detection has gained a great deal of
attention both from the research and academic communi-
ties. In their work, they identified three types of fake news:
(1) the text of an article, (2) the user response it receives,
and (3) the source on which users promote it. They ana-
lyzed that fake news has the importance to affect public
opinion. Existing studies have mostly focused on tailoring
solutions to one particular problem with their limited suc-
cess. However, Ruchansky et al. (2017) proposed a hybrid
model combining all their characteristics to predict the more
accurate and automated result. Similarly, Long et al. (2017)
proposed a novel method to incorporate speaker profiles into
an attention-based LSTM model for fake news detection.
Additionally, several studies described that LSTM-based
hybrid model is proven to work better for long sentences and
attention models are also proposed to weigh the importance

Q) Springer

Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82
of different words in their context (Tang et al. 2015; Prova
et al. 2019).

In another study, Kudugunta and Ferrara (2018) stated
that bots have been used to sway political elections by dis-
torting online discourse, to manipulate the stock market that
may have caused health epidemics. They applied LSTM-
based architecture that exploits both content and metadata
to detect bots. They claimed that their model can achieve an
extremely high accuracy exceeding 0.96 AUC. Yenala et al.
(2018) identified that the automatic detection and filtering of
inappropriate messages or comments have become an impor-
tant problem for improving the quality of conversations with
users as well as virtual agents. They proposed a novel hybrid
DL model to automatically identify the inappropriate lan-
guage. Zhao et al. (2015) created a hybrid model namely
C-LSTM where they combined CNN and LSTM for the
sentiment analysis of movie reviews and question-type
classification.

4 Discussion with open issues and future
research

Over the few years, several researchers have applied the
recent developments and easy access of DL techniques to
fake news, rumor, spam, etc. in the online social networks.
It enables frameworks to process, handle, and adapt a lot of
information. It is now being utilized the most in business
insight frameworks and predictive analytics, as well as in
increasingly advanced learning management systems (LMS).
Therefore, we followed various DL methods inspired by the
guidelines of Pouyanfar et al. (2018), Pouyanfar and Chen
(2016), Perozzi et al. (2014), and Savage et al. (2014). The
development of DL can potentially benefit to MID research.
However, existing studies are not directly comparable to
each other due to the lack of large-scale publicly available
datasets. There are still numerous improvements that can
be made to the models. Furthermore, DL is one of the most
effective methods for the present development of innovation
in the world. This method has given computers remarkable
power, for example, the capacity to perceive discourse simi-
lar to a human, to prepare a model with no requirement for
feature extraction or data labeling. It is currently being uti-
lized to guide and improve a wide range of key procedures.
As previously stated there are many reasons to apply DL
to MID, we summarize some of the strengths of the deep
learning-based model in the following.

e First, deep learning techniques are more robust and effec-
tive than state-of-the-art baseline approaches and have
shown their strength in various applications, in particu-
lar, misinformation (fake, spam, rumor, false informa-
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82

Table 4 Summary of datasets used by existing efforts

Dataset Problem Tackled Text Content Num-
ber of
Instances
BuzzfeedPolitical Fake news detection v 120
LIAR Fake news detection v 12.8K
CREDBANK Fact extraction v 4856
FakeNewsNet Rumor detection v CNN
Twitter Rumor detection J 1111
PHEME Rumor detection v 6425
NewsEFN-2014 Fake news detection v 221
PolitiFact Fake news detection v 488
Weibo Rumor detection v 816
YelpChi Fake review detection J 67K
YelpNYC Spam detection Jv 359K
YelpZip Spam detection J 608K
Twitter dataset Spam detection Jv 5.5M
KaggleEmergent* Rumor detection Jv 2145
KaggleFN° Fake news detection Jv 13K
FacebookHoax* Hoax detection v 15.5K
BuzzfeedNews Misleading detection Jv 2282
Enron emai? Disinformation detection Y SM
Fraudulent emai® Disinformation detection Y 2500
Italian dataset Disinformation detection Y 160K

“https://www.kaggle.com/arminehn/rumor-citation
>https://www.kaggle.com/mrisdal/fake-news
“https://github.com/gabll/some-like-it-hoax/tree/master/dataset
dhttps://www.kaggle.com/wcukierski/enron-email-dataset

“https://www.kaggle.com/rtatman/fraudulent-email-corpus

tion, disinformation, troll, etc.) and detection (Wu et al.
2019; Zhang et al. 2016).

e Second, deep learning architecture can be easily adapted
to a new problem, e.g., using CNNs, RNNs, or LSTM,
GAN, DBN, etc., which is valuable for MID.

e Third, deep learning techniques are highly flexibile espe-
cially with the advent of much popular deep learning
frameworks such as Tensorflow, Keras, Caffe, PyTorch,
and Theano.

e Fourth, deep learning techniques can deal with complex
interaction patterns and precisely reflect users’ prefer-
ences.

4.1 Existing dataset

The establishment of unique solutions for MID has often
been dependent on limited and quality datasets. Therefore, to
encourage future research work, we highlighted some recent
and quality datasets related to the misinformation task in

Page l30f20 82

Num- Ground Truth References
ber of
Classes
2 J Silverman et al. (2016)
6 v Wang (2017)
2 J Mitra and Gilbert (2015)
v Shu et al. (2019b, (2017)
2 J Maet al. (2018)
2 J Aiello et al. (2013), (Kochkina et al. 2018)
5 J Nan et al. (2015), (Vlachos and Riedel
2014)
2 J Bathla et al. (2018), Horne and Adali (2017)
2 J Maet al. (2016)
2 J Mukherjee et al. (2013)
2 v Rayana and Akoglu (2015)
2 v Rayana and Akoglu (2015)
2 J Concone et al. (2019)
3 v
1 v
2 J Tacchini et al. (2017)
4 J Silverman et al. (2016)
2 J Dhamani et al. (2019)
2 J Dhamani et al. (2019)
2 J Pierri et al. (2020)

Table 4. Such datasets are needed to understand the reasons
for applying DL techniques to MID and collectively improve
the state-of-the-art. Although several established techniques
have been used for MID in different domains, they are not
similar to each other. Due to various research directions,
the data collections could vary significantly. Moreover, the
available data resource from existing research work is also
hard for the collection. For instance, some datasets mainly
focus on personal issues while others consist of political,
business, and socially relevant issues. Additionally, data-
sets may vary depending on what sorts of text contents are
incorporated, what labels are given, how labels are gathered,
whether fraudulent information is recorded, etc.

4.2 Open issues

In this section, we summarise some limitations which
we identified and proposed some ideas to address these
limitations:

Semantics Understanding Misinformation which is fabri-
cated or manipulated to mislead users. It is very difficult for

Q) Springer
82 Page 14 of 20

a machine to completely understand such semantics. Exist-
ing studies (Shu et al. 2019a; Brasoveanu and Andonie 2019)
for MID covers various kinds of language styles. However,
the understanding of semantic features is necessary to dis-
tinguish between different weapons and to improve the per-
formance of MID.

Multimodal Data for Misinformation In the existing liter-
ature, there are several studies related to MID such as rumors
detection, fake news detection, and spam detection based on
multi-modal features are exist. According to the previous
studies (Wang et al. 2018; Farajtabar et al. 2017; Jin et al.
2017b), we specify that misinformation on social media
takes the form of text, images, or videos and the information
in different modalities can provide clues for MID. However,
how to extract these prominent features from each modality
is challenging. Also, comprehensive and large-scale datasets
are needed for MID.

Content Validation Due to misinformation, users are often
confronted with misleading, confusing, controversial issues
that need to be addressed very well. However, it is also true
that too beautifully identifiable misinformation is difficult.
Therefore, to easily identify incorrect information on online
social media, we need a very good quality fact-checker and
a special tool for crowdsourcing content validation can be
developed

Spreader Identification Identifying the influential spread-
ers in social networks is a very important topic, which is
conducive to deeply understand the role of nodes in informa-
tion diffusion and epidemic spreading among a population.
However, existing techniques are not able to quantify the
nodal spreading capability correctly nor can they differenti-
ate the influence of various nodes.

Misinformation Identification At present, many types of
misidentification methods have been introduced in the exist-
ing research. However, most of the research works (a) tend to
focus on alerting users but give no explanation as to why this
is misinformation; (b) focus more on directly engaged users
for the detection of misinformation. But if the users are not
directly related, some users play an effective role in spread-
ing misinformation on online social media. As they are not
directly related, identifying them is a very difficult job.

Anomalous and Normal User Identification As the num-
ber of people who depend on online social media are grow-
ing, dishonest users try to exploit this opportunity. In most
cases, dishonest people do this for their benefit (Zhao et al.
2014; Feng and Hirst 2013). Although researchers have
used many methods to identify dishonest users, many more
approaches can be investigated, for example, perhaps a new
technique or modified version of an existing technique could
be developed.

Bridging Echo Chamber Social media echo chambers
play an important rule in spreading the presence of misinfor-
mation. One of the strategies for MID is to bridge conflicting

Q) Springer

Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82

echo chambers so that opposing opponents can be exchanged
and considered. Therefore, data-driven models are an effec-
tive means which are needed to bridge these echo chambers.
Also, researchers need to research to reduce the polarization
effectiveness.

Mining Disinformation The widespread of disinformation
can cause detrimental societal effects. Therefore, mining dis-
information is desired to prevent a large number of people to
be affected. From the discussion of existing studies, we find
a recent improvement for disinformation in SN. However,
due to its diversity, complexity, multi-modality, and costs of
fact-checking, it is still non-trivial. Additionally, it is often
unrealistic to obtain abundant labeled data. Existing studies
argued that due to overfitting on small labeled datasets, the
performance is largely limited (Wei and Wan 2017; Kim
et al. 2018). In addition, models learned on one domain may
be biased and might not perform well on a different target
domain. Therefore, advanced DL strategies such as rein-
forcement learning can be utilized to tackle this problem,
explore more information and better detect disinformation.

Misinformation Dynamic The spread of misinformation
on social networking sites mainly depends on the content of
the information, the impact of the users’ behavior, and the
network structure. Most studies on misinformation analyzed
the various effects of static data but have not analyzed the
effects of topology on real-time data (Wei and Wan 2017;
Kim et al. 2018). Therefore, we need to consider dynamic
model to capture the uncertainty of user behavior to reduce
the spread of fake news and misinformation.

4.3 Future direction

As with anything, there are both good and bad aspects of
technology dependence. Spreading misinformation in SN is
one such example. There have been a lot of research works
on MID, and good results have been achieved by various
effective techniques. However, we have to keep in mind that
the current age is knowledge-based and technology-depend-
ent. Therefore, researchers have to think deeply about how
their research can transform people’s wellbeing in a technol-
ogy-dependent era. Thus, in this paper, we have discussed
some of the effective roles that elimination of misinforma-
tion can have on online SN with DL techniques. Moreover,
we focused on the impact, characteristics, and detection of
misinformation using DL techniques. In summary, the fol-
lowing are several findings of this article and possible future
works:

e One of the important tasks of DL is that it can work with
large-sized data which the other techniques cannot. How-
ever, DL also has difficulty to find and process massive
datasets, and generally to train the model, DL networks
require a lot of time. In today’s competitive age, it is
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82
worthwhile to research how to train large data in a short
time with DL. We believe DL should be investigated in
the future.

e Most current studies show that researchers can analyze
static data on a given topic and predict the positive or
negative aspects of that topic. However, it is high time to
analyze dynamic data.

e The practice of detecting false facts from SN data is very
popular and is benefiting people greatly. However, this
involves descriptive research which is explainable MID,
not just predictive research. With MID, if a new part
can be added such as the description of why it is false,
then maybe that research will be even more effective and
acceptable to people.

e Deep reinforcement learning is a new area of machine
learning that enables an agent to learn in a good interac-
tive environment by experimenting with feedback from it
own experience. So, if we combine reinforcement learn-
ing with DL to detect false facts, then better results can
be obtained.

e Deep learning faces the over-fitting problem which
impacts the execution of the model in real-life situations.

5 Conclusion

In this survey, we reviewed various research works on MID
in social networks. In particular, we took a comprehensive
view of five related terms of misinformation: false informa-
tion, rumor, spam, fake news, and disinformation and dis-
cussed how misinformation misleads people on social net-
works. We also discussed the importance of earlier works as
this may be helpful to other researchers who wish to inves-
tigate this area. Comparing with the most existing detection
approaches, we considered DL is an efficient and effective
technique to measure the misinformation problem on online
social networks. We emphasized that DL is now the lead-
ing technique to solve MID problems because it helps in
identifying false facts perfectly. The result and performance
are excellent and it is similar to human performance. In all
respects, DL 1s one of the best techniques to analyze social
network data. We also demonstrated that DL can be utilized
to improve MID given unlabeled and imbalanced data. How-
ever, there are several challenges (data volume, data quality,
domain complexity, interpretability, explainability, feature
enrichment, federated inference, model privacy, incorpo-
rating expert knowledge, temporal modeling, etc.) which
need to be improved in further research work. Therefore,
deep learning-based MID is still an active research topic
and needs to be extended in future research. This paper can
benefit others who will choose to investigate DL models.
Existing research works used DL and have done exten-
sive work for MID. Most of the existing research works

Page l5o0f20 82

have discussed the connection of one user to another in SN,
their historical activities, etc. in spreading false facts. How-
ever, there are very few studies that have incorporated user
mental health conditions with the user’s historical activity.
Although in the above section, we introduced some future
directions, one of the main future directions of our research
is to expand modeling. Therefore, First, we can analyze user
connections and their historical activity on SN where the
user can reflect how they relate to the spread of fake news.
Second, we can incorporate the human mental condition
with the user’s historical data, which can better analyze the
user’s activity, since the tendency to spread false information
is related to the user’s human mental condition.

References

Abadi M, Agarwal A, Barham P, Brevdo E, Chen Z, Citro C, Cor-
rado GS, Davis A, Dean J, Devin M, et al. (2015) Tensorflow:
large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems, 2015.
Software available from tensorflow. org |

Abdel-Hamid O, Mohamed, A.r., Jiang, H., Deng, L., Penn, G.,
Yu, D., (2014) Convolutional neural networks for speech
recognition. IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process
22:1533-1545

Acquisti A, Gross R (2009) Predicting social security numbers from
public data. Proc Nat Acad Sci 106:10975—10980

Aiello LM, Petkos G, Martin C, Corney D, Papadopoulos S, Skraba
R, Géker A, Kompatsiaris I, Jaames A (2013) Sensing trending
topics in twitter. IEEE Trans Multimedia 15:1268—1282

Aizenberg IN (1999) Neural networks based on multi-valued and
universal binary neurons: theory, application to image process-
ing and recognition. In: International conference on computa-
tional intelligence, Springer, pp 306-316

Alkhodair SA, Ding SH, Fung BC, Liu J (2020) Detecting breaking
news rumors of emerging topics in social media. Inf Process
Manag 57:102018

Alom MZ, Bontupalli V, Taha TM (2015) Intrusion detection using
deep belief networks. In: 2015 national aerospace and electron-
ics conference (NAECON), IEEE, pp 339-344

Bathla G, Aggarwal H, Rani R (2018) Improving recommendation
techniques by deep learning and large scale graph partitioning.
Int J Adv Comput Sci Appl 9:403—409

Bharti SK, Pradhan R, Babu KS, Jena SK (2017) Sarcasm analysis
on twitter data using machine learning approaches. In: Trends
in social network analysis. Springer, pp 51—76

Bindu P, Thilagam PS, Ahuja D (2017) Discovering suspicious
behavior in multilayer social networks. Comput Hum Behav
73:568—-582

Brandt AM (2012) Inventing conflicts of interest: a history of
tobacco industry tactics. Am J Public Health 102:63-71

Brasoveanu AM, Andonie R (2019) Semantic fake news detection:
a machine learning perspective. In: International work-con-
ference on artificial neural networks, Springer, pp 656—667

Chalapathy R, Chawla S (2019) Deep learning for anomaly detection:
a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1901.03407

Chen T, Li X, Yin H, Zhang J (2018) Call attention to rumors: Deep
attention based recurrent neural networks for early rumor
detection. In: Pacific-Asia conference on knowledge discovery
and data mining, Springer, pp 40-52

Chen YC, Liu ZY, Kao HY (2017) Ikm at semeval-2017 task 8:
vonvolutional neural networks for stance detection and rumor

Q) Springer
82 Page 16 of 20

verification. In: Proceedings of the 11th international work-
shop on semantic evaluation (SemEval-2017), pp 465-469

Cho K, van Merriénboer B, Gulcehre C, Bahdanau D, Bougares F,
Schwenk H, Bengio Y, (2014a) Learning phrase representations
using RNN encoder—decoder for statistical machine translation.
In: Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in
natural language processing (EMNLP), Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Doha, Qatar. pp 1724-1734. https://www.
aclweb.org/anthology/D 14-1179, 10.3115/v1/D14-1179

Cho K, Van Merriénboer B, Gulcehre C, Bahdanau D, Bougares F,
Schwenk H, Bengio Y (2014b) Learning phrase representations
using rnn encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation.
arXiv preprint arXiv: 1406.1078

Chollet F (2018) Deep learning mit Python und Keras: Das Praxis-
Handbuch vom Entwickler der Keras-Bibliothek. MITP-Ver-
lags GmbH & Co, KG

Citlak O, Dérterler M, DoSru IA (2019) A survey on detecting spam
accounts on twitter network. Soc Netw Anal Min 9:35

Collobert R, Bengio S, Mariéthoz J (2002) Torch: a modular machine
learning software library. Technical Report, Idiap

Collobert R, Kavukcuoglu K, Farabet C (2011) Torch7: a matlab-like
environment for machine learning. In: BigLearn, NIPS workshop

Concone F, Re GL, Morana M, Ruocco C (2019) Twitter spam account
detection by effective labeling. In: ITASEC

Cresci S, Di Pietro R, Petrocchi M, Spognardi A, Tesconi M (2015)
Fame for sale: efficient detection of fake twitter followers. Decis
Support Syst 80:56—71

Cui L, Wang S, Lee D (2019) Same: sentiment-aware multi-modal
embedding for detecting fake news. In: Proceedings of the 2019
IEEE/ACM international conference on advances in social net-
works analysis and mining, pp 41-48

Da Silva LA, Da Costa KA, Papa JP, Rosa G, De Albuquerque VHC
(2018) Fine-tuning restricted boltzmann machines using qua-
ternions and its application for spam detection. IET Netw
8:101-105

Dai JJ, Wang Y, Qiu X, Ding D, Zhang Y, Wang Y, Jia X, Zhang LC,
Wan Y, Li Z, Wang J, Huang S, Wu Z, Wang Y, Yang Y, She
B, Shi D, Lu Q, Huang K, Song G (2019) Bigdl: A distributed
deep learning framework for big data. In: Proceedings of the
ACM symposium on cloud computing, Association for Comput-
ing Machinery. pp 50-60. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1804.05839.pdf,
10.1145/3357223.3362707

Dandekar A, Zen RA, Bressan S (2017) Generating fake but realistic
headlines using deep neural networks. In: International confer-
ence on database and expert systems applications, Springer, pp
427-440

David OE, Netanyahu NS (2015) Deepsign: Deep learning for auto-
matic malware signature generation and classification. In: 2015
international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN),
IEEE, pp 1-8

De Choudhury M, Counts S, Horvitz E (2013a) Predicting postpartum
changes in emotion and behavior via social media. In: Proceed-
ings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing
systems, ACM, pp 3267-3276

De Choudhury M, Gamon M, Hoff A, Roseway A (2013b) 4AlJmoon
phrasesaAl: a social media faciliated tool for emotional reflection
and wellness. In: 2013 7th international conference on pervasive
computing technologies for healthcare and workshops, IEEE,
pp 41-44

Dechter R (1986) Learning while searching in constraint-satisfaction
problems. University of California, Computer Science Depart-
ment, Cognitive Systems aAe

Dhamani N, Azunre P, Gleason JL, Corcoran C, Honke G, Kramer S,
Morgan J (2019) Using deep networks and transfer learning to
address disinformation. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1905.10412

Donfro J (2013) A whopping 20% of yelp reviews are fake

Q) Springer

Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82

Du M, Li F, Zheng G, Srikumar V (2017) Deeplog: Anomaly detec-
tion and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning. In:
Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer
and communications security, ACM, pp 1285-1298

Fallis D (2014) A functional analysis of disinformation. In: Conference
2014 proceedings

Farajtabar M, Yang J, Ye X, Xu H, Trivedi R, Khalil E, Li S, Song
L, Zha H (2017) Fake news mitigation via point process based
intervention. In: Proceedings of the 34th international conference
on machine learning, vol 70, pp 1097-1106

Feng VW, Hirst G (2013) Detecting deceptive opinions with profile
compatibility. In: Proceedings of the sixth international joint
conference on natural language processing, pp 338-346

Fernandez M, Alani H (2018) Online misinformation: challenges and
future directions. Companion Proc Web Conf 2018:595-602

Friggeri A, Adamic L, Eckles D, Cheng J (2014) Rumor cascades. In:
Eighth international AAAI conference on weblogs and social
media

Galitsky B (2015) Detecting rumor and disinformation by web mining.
In: 2015 AAAT Spring symposium series

Gao H, Liu H (2014) Data analysis on location-based social networks.
Mobile Soc Netw 11:165-194

Gong M, Gao Y, Xie Y, Qin A (2020) An attention-based unsupervised
adversarial model for movie review spam detection. In: IEEE
transactions on multimedia

Goodfellow I, Pouget-Abadie J, Mirza M, Xu B, Warde-Farley D,
Ozair S, Courville A, Bengio Y (2014) Generative adversarial
nets. In: Advances in neural information processing systems, pp
2672-2680

Goswami A, Kumar A (2016) A survey of event detection techniques
in online social networks. Soc Netw Anal Min 6:107

Guo B, Ding Y, Yao L, Liang Y, Yu Z (2019) The future of misinfor-
mation detection: new perspectives and trends. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.03654

Guo H, Cao J, Zhang Y, Guo J, Li J (2018) Rumor detection with
hierarchical social attention network. In: Proceedings of the 27th
ACM international conference on information and knowledge
management, ACM, pp 943-951

Gupta A, Kumaraguru P, Castillo C, Meier P (2014) Tweetcred: Real-
time credibility assessment of content on twitter. In: International
Conference on Social Informatics, Springer, pp 228-243

Gupta A, Lamba H, Kumaraguru P, Joshi A (2013) Faking sandy: char-
acterizing and identifying fake images on twitter during hurri-
cane sandy. In: Proceedings of the 22nd international conference
on World Wide Web, ACM, pp 729-736

Habib A, Asghar MZ, Khan A, Habib A, Khan A (2019) False informa-
tion detection in online content and its role in decision making: a
systematic literature review. Soc Netw Anal Min 9:50

Hardy W, Chen L, Hou S, Ye Y, Li X (2016) Dl4md: a deep learning
framework for intelligent malware detection. In: Proceedings of
the international conference on data mining (DMIN), the steering
committee of the world congress in computer science, computer
aAe, p 61

Helmstetter S, Paulheim H (2018) Weakly supervised learning for fake
news detection on twitter. In: 2018 IEEE/ACM international
conference on advances in social networks analysis and mining
(ASONAM), IEEE, pp 274-277

Hernon P (1995) Disinformation and misinformation through the inter-
net: findings of an exploratory study. Gov Inf Q 12:133-139

Hinton G, Deng L, Yu D, Dahl G, Mohamed Ar, Jaitly N, Senior A,
Vanhoucke V, Nguyen P, Kingsbury B, et al. (2012) Deep neural
networks for acoustic modeling in speech recognition. In: IEEE
Signal processing magazine, p 29

Horne BD, Adali S (2017) This just in: fake news packs a lot in title,
uses simpler, repetitive content in text body, more similar to
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82

satire than real news. In: Eleventh international AAAI confer-
ence on web and social media

Hu X, Tang J, Zhang Y, Liu H (2013) Social spammer detection in
microblogging. In: Twenty-third international joint conference
on artificial intelligence

Islam MR, Kabir MA, Ahmed A, Kamal ARM, Wang H, Ulhaq A
(2018a) Depression detection from social network data using
machine learning techniques. Health Inf Sci Syst 6:8

Islam MR, Kamal ARM, Sultana N, Islam R, Moni MA, et al. (2018b)
Detecting depression using k-nearest neighbors (knn) classifica-
tion technique. In: 2018 international conference on computer,
communication, chemical, material and electronic engineering
(IC4ME2), IEEE, pp 1-4

Islam MR, Miah SJ, Kamal ARM, Burmeister O (2019) A design
construct of developing approaches to measure mental health
conditions. In: Australasian journal of information systems, p 23

Jacovi A, Shalom OS, Goldberg Y (2018) Understanding convolutional
neural networks for text classification. arXiv preprint arXiv
:1809.08037

Jain S, Sharma V, Kaushal R (2016) Towards automated real-time
detection of misinformation on twitter. In: 2016 international
conference on advances in computing. Communications and
informatics (ICACC]), IEEE, pp 2015-2020

Jia Y, Shelhamer E, Donahue J, Karayev S, Long J, Girshick R, Gua-
darrama S, Darrell T (2014) Caffe: convolutional architecture
for fast feature embedding. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
international conference on Multimedia, ACM, pp 675-678

Jia Y, Song X, Zhou J, Liu L, Nie L, Rosenblum DS (2016) Fus-
ing social networks with deep learning for volunteerism ten-
dency prediction. In: Thirtieth AAAI conference on artificial
intelligence

Jin D, Ge M, Li Z, Lu W, He D, Fogelman-Soulie F (2017a) Using
deep learning for community discovery in social networks. In:
2017 IEEE 29th international conference on tools with artificial
intelligence ICTAI), IEEE, pp 160-167

Jin Z, Cao J, Guo H, Zhang Y, Luo J (2017b) Multimodal fusion with
recurrent neural networks for rumor detection on microblogs.
In: Proceedings of the 25th ACM international conference on
multimedia, pp 795-816

Jin Z, Cao J, Guo H, Zhang Y, Wang Y, Luo J (2017c) Detection and
analysis of 2016 us presidential election related rumors on twit-
ter. In: International conference on social computing, behavioral-
cultural modeling and prediction and behavior representation in
modeling and simulation, Springer, pp 14-24

Jin Z, Cao J, Zhang Y, Zhou J, Tian Q (2016) Novel visual and statisti-
cal image features for microblogs news verification. IEEE Trans
Multimedia 19:598—608

Jindal S, Sood R, Singh R, Vatsa M, Chakraborty T (xxxx) Newsbag: a
multimodal benchmark dataset for fake news detection

Ketkar N (2017) Introduction to pytorch. In: Deep learning with
python. Springer, pp 195—208

Kim J, Tabibian B, Oh A, Schédlkopf B, Gomez-Rodriguez M (2018)
Leveraging the crowd to detect and reduce the spread of fake
news and misinformation. In: Proceedings of the eleventh ACM
international conference on web search and data mining, pp
324-332

Kim Y (2014) Convolutional neural networks for sentence classifica-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1408.5882

King DE (2009) Dlib-ml: a machine learning toolkit. J Mach Learn
Res 10:1755-1758

Kochkina E, Liakata M, Zubiaga A (2018) All-in-one: Multi-task learn-
ing for rumour verification. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1806.03713

Kudugunta S, Ferrara E (2018) Deep neural networks for bot detection.
Inf Sci 467:312—322

Page l7of20 82

Kumar S, Asthana R, Upadhyay S, Upreti N, Akbar M (2019) Fake
news detection using deep learning models: a novel approach.
Trans Emerg Telecommun Technol 5:e3767

Kumar S, Shah N (2018) False information on web and social media:
a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.08559

Kumar S, West R, Leskovec J (2016) Disinformation on the web:
Impact, characteristics, and detection of wikipedia hoaxes. In:
Proceedings of the 25th international conference on World Wide
Web, pp 591-602

Kwon S, Cha M, Jung K (2017) Rumor detection over varying time
windows. PloS ONE 12:69

Lake JM (2014) Fake web addresses and hyperlinks. US Patent
8,799,465

LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G (2015) Deep learning. Nature 521:436

LeCun Y, Kavukcuoglu K, Farabet C (2010) Convolutional networks
and applications in vision. In: Proceedings of 2010 IEEE inter-
national symposium on circuits and systems, IEEE, pp 253-256

Li C, Liu S (2018) A comparative study of the class imbalance problem
in twitter spam detection. Concurr Comput Pract Exp 30:e4281

Li L, Cai G, Chen N (2018a) A rumor events detection method based
on deep bidirectional gru neural network. In: 2018 IEEE 3rd
international conference on image. Vision and computing
(ICIVC), IEEE, pp 755-759

Li X, Wu X (2015) Constructing long short-term memory based deep
recurrent neural networks for large vocabulary speech recog-
nition. In: 2015 IEEE international conference on acoustics.
Speech and signal processing (ICASSP), IEEE, pp 4520-4524

Li Y, Nie X, Huang R (2018b) Web spam classification method based
on deep belief networks. Expert Syst Appl 96:261—270

Liao L, Jin W, Pavel R (2016) Enhanced restricted boltzmann
machine with prognosability regularization for prognostics and
health assessment. IEEE Trans Industr Electron 63:7076—7083

Lin X, Liao X, Xu T, Pian W, Wong KF (2019) Rumor detection with
hierarchical recurrent convolutional neural network. In: CCF
international conference on natural language processing and
chinese computing, Springer, pp 338-348

Liu Q, Yu F, Wu S, Wang L (2018) Mining significant microblogs
for misinformation identification: an attention-based approach.
ACM Trans Intell Syst Technol 9:1—20

Liu Y, Wu YFB (2018) Early detection of fake news on social media
through propagation path classification with recurrent and con-
volutional networks. In: Thirty-second AAAI conference on
artificial intelligence

Liu Y, Wu YFB (2020) Fned: a deep network for fake news early
detection on social media. ACM Trans Inf Syst 38:1-—33

Liu Y, Xu S (2016) Detecting rumors through modeling information
propagation networks in a social media environment. IEEE
Trans Comput Soc Syst 3:46—62

Long Y, Lu Q, Xiang R, Li M, Huang CR (2017) Fake news detection
through multi-perspective speaker profiles. In: Proceedings of
the eighth international joint conference on natural language
processing, vol 2, pp 252-256

Ma J, Gao W, Mitra P, Kwon S, Jansen BJ, Wong KF, Cha M (2016)
Detecting rumors from microblogs with recurrent neural net-
works. In: Ijcai, pp 3818-3824

Ma J, Gao W, Wei Z, Lu Y, Wong KF (2015) Detect rumors using
time series of social context information on microblogging
websites. In: Proceedings of the 24th ACM international on
conference on information and knowledge management, pp
1751-1754

Ma J, Gao W, Wong KF (2018) Rumor detection on twitter with tree-
structured recursive neural networks. In: Proceedings of the 56th
annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics,
vol 1, pp 1980-1989

Q) Springer
82 Page 18 of 20

Ma J, Gao W, Wong KF (2019) Detect rumors on twitter by promoting
information campaigns with generative adversarial learning. In:
The World Wide Web Conference, ACM, pp 3049-3055

Markines B, Cattuto C, Menczer F (2009) Social spam detection. In:
Proceedings of the 5th international workshop on adversarial
information retrieval on the web, pp 41-48

Mitra T, Gilbert E (2015) Credbank: A large-scale social media corpus
with associated credibility annotations. In: ICWSM, pp 258-267

Mukherjee A, Venkataraman V, Liu B, Glance NS (2013) What yelp
fake review filter might be doing? In: Icwsm, pp 409-418

Nan CJ, Kim KM, Zhang BT (2015) Social network analysis of tv
drama characters via deep concept hierarchies. In: 2015 IEEE/
ACM international conference on advances in social networks
analysis and mining (ASONAM), IEEE, pp 831-836

Naseem U, Razzak I, Musial K, Imran M (2020) Transformer based
deep intelligent contextual embedding for twitter sentiment
analysis. Future Gener Comput Syst 6:91

Nguyen DT, Al Mannai KA, Joty S, Sajjad H, Imran M, Mitra P
(2017a) Robust classification of crisis-related data on social net-
works using convolutional neural networks. In: Eleventh interna-
tional AAAI conference on web and social media

Nguyen TN, Li C, Niederée C (2017b) On early-stage debunking
rumors on twitter: Leveraging the wisdom of weak learners.
In: International conference on social informatics, Springer,
pp 141-158

Norouzi M (2009) Convolutional restricted Boltzmann machines for
feature learning. Ph.D. thesis. School of Computing Science-
Simon Fraser University

Norouzi M, Ranjbar M, Mori G (2009) Stacks of convolutional
restricted boltzmann machines for shift-invariant feature learn-
ing. In: 2009 IEFE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, IEEE, pp 2735-2742

Papa JP, Rosa GH, Marana AN, Scheirer W, Cox DD (2015) Model
selection for discriminative restricted boltzmann machines
through meta-heuristic techniques. J Comput Sci 9:14—18

Parvat A, Chavan J, Kadam S, Dev S, Pathak V (2017) A survey of
deep-learning frameworks. In: 2017 international conference
on inventive systems and control (ICISC), IEEE, pp 1-7

Perozzi B, Al-Rfou R, Skiena S (2014) Deepwalk: Online learning
of social representations. In: Proceedings of the 20th ACM
SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery
and data mining, ACM, pp 701-710

Pierri F, Piccardi C, Ceri S (2020) A multi-layer approach to disinfor-
mation detection on twitter. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.12612

Popat K, Mukherjee S, Yates A, Weikum G (2018) Declare: debunk-
ing fake news and false claims using evidence-aware deep
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.06416

Pouyanfar S, Chen SC (2016) Semantic event detection using ensem-
ble deep learning. In: 2016 IEEE international symposium on
multimedia (ISM), IEEE, pp 203-208

Pouyanfar S, Sadiq S, Yan Y, Tian H, Tao Y, Reyes MP, Shyu ML,
Chen SC, Iyengar S (2018) A survey on deep learning: algo-
rithms, techniques, and applications. ACM Comput Surv 51:92

Prova AA, Akter T, Islam MR, Uddin MR, Hossain T, Hannan M,
Hossain MS (2019) Analysis of online marketplace data on
social networks using Istm. In: 2019 5th international confer-
ence on advances in electrical engineering (ICAEE), IEEE,
pp 381-385

Qazvinian V, Rosengren E, Radev DR, Mei Q (2011) Rumor has
it: Identifying misinformation in microblogs. In: Proceedings
of the conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing, Association for. Computational Linguistics, pp
1589-1599

Qian F, Gong C, Sharma K, Liu Y (2018) Neural user response gen-
erator: Fake news detection with collective user intelligence. In:
IJCAI, pp 3834-3840

Q) Springer

Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82

Quah JT, Sriganesh M (2008) Real-time credit card fraud detec-
tion using computational intelligence. Expert Syst Appl
35:1721-1732

Rayana S, Akoglu L (2015). Collective opinion spam detection: Bridg-
ing review networks and metadata. In: Proceedings of the 21th
acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and
data mining, pp 985-994

Roy A, Basak K, Ekbal A, Bhattacharyya P (2018) A deep ensemble
framework for fake news detection and classification. arXiv pre-
print arXiv:1811.04670

Ruchansky N, Seo S, Liu Y (2017) Csi: A hybrid deep model for fake
news detection. In: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on conference
on information and knowledge management, ACM, pp 797-806

Saberi A, Vahidi M, Bidgoli BM (2007) Learn to detect phishing scams
using learning and ensemble? methods. In: 2007 IEEE/WIC/
ACM international conferences on web intelligence and intel-
ligent agent technology-workshops, IEEE, pp 311-314

Sampson J, Morstatter F, Wu L, Liu H (2016) Leveraging the implicit
structure within social media for emergent rumor detection. In:
Proceedings of the 25th ACM international on conference on
information and knowledge management, pp 2377-2382

Savage D, Zhang X, Yu X, Chou P, Wang Q (2014) Anomaly detection
in online social networks. Soc Netw 39:62—70

Selvaganapathy S, Nivaashini M, Natarajan H (2018) Deep belief
network based detection and categorization of malicious urls.
Inf Secur J Global Perspect 27:145-161

Shahariar G, Biswas S, Omar F, Shah FM, Hassan SB (2019) Spam
review detection using deep learning. In: 2019 IEEE 10th
annual information technology, electronics and mobile com-
munication conference (IEMCON), IEEE, pp 0027-0033

Sharma K, Qian F, Jiang H, Ruchansky N, Zhang M, Liu Y (2019)
Combating fake news: a survey on identification and mitigation
techniques. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.06437

Shi S, Wang Q, Chu X (2018) Performance modeling and evalua-
tion of distributed deep learning frameworks on gpus. In: 2018
IEEE 16th international conference on dependable, autonomic
and secure computing, 1 6th international conference on perva-
sive intelligence and computing, 4th international conference
on big data intelligence and computing and cyber science and
technology congress (DASC/PiCom/DataCom/CyberSciTech),
IEEE, pp 949-957

Shu K, Cui L, Wang S, Lee D, Liu H (2019a) defend: Explainable
fake news detection. In: Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIG-
KDD international conference on knowledge discovery and
data mining, pp 395-405

Shu K, Mahudeswaran D, Wang S, Lee D, Liu H (2018) Fakenews-
net: a data repository with news content, social context and
dynamic information for studying fake news on social media.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.01286

Shu K, Sliva A, Wang S, Tang J, Liu H (2017) Fake news detection
on social media: a data mining perspective. ACM SIGKDD
Explor Newslett 19:22—36

Shu K, Wang S, Lee D, Liu H (2020) Mining disinformation and
fake news: concepts, methods, and recent advancements. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2001.00623

Shu K, Wang S, Liu H (2019b) Beyond news contents: The role of
social context for fake news detection. In: Proceedings of the
twelfth ACM international conference on web search and data
mining, pp 312-320

Shu K, Zhou X, Wang S, Zafarani R, Liu H (2019c) The role of user
profiles for fake news detection. In: Proceedings of the 2019
IEEE/ACM international conference on advances in social net-
works analysis and mining, pp 436-439

Silva L, Ribeiro P, Rosa G, Costa K, Papa JP (2015) Parameter set-
ting-free harmony search optimization of restricted boltzmann
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82

machines and its applications to spam detection. In: 12th inter-
national conference applied computing, pp 142-150

da Silva LA, da Costa KAP, Ribeiro PB, de Rosa GH, Papa JP (2016)
Learning spam features using restricted boltzmann machines.
IADIS International Journal on Computer Science & Informa-
tion Systems 11

Silverman C, Strapagiel L, Shaban H, Hall E, Singer-Vine J (2016)
Hyperpartisan facebook pages are publishing false and mis-
leading information at an alarming rate. Buzzfeed News 20:68

Socher R, Perelygin A, Wu J, Chuang J, Manning CD, Ng A, Potts C
(2013) Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality
over a sentiment treebank. In: Proceedings of the 2013 confer-
ence on empirical methods in natural language processing, pp
1631-1642

Srivastava N, Salakhutdinov RR (2012) Multimodal learning with
deep boltzmann machines. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems, pp 2222-2230

Sun X, Zhang C, Ding S, Quan C (2018) Detecting anomalous emo-
tion through big data from social networks based on a deep
learning method. Multimedia Tools Appl 5:1—22

Tacchini E, Ballarin G, Della Vedova ML, Moret S, de Alfaro L
(2017) Some like it hoax: automated fake news detection in
social networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.07506

Tang D, Qin B, Liu T (2015) Document modeling with gated recurrent
neural network for sentiment classification. In: Proceedings of the
2015 conference on empirical methods in natural language process-
ing, pp 1422-1432

Tschiatschek S, Singla A, Gomez Rodriguez M, Merchant A, Krause A
(2018) Fake news detection in social networks via crowd signals.
In: Companion of the the web conference 2018 on the web con-
ference 2018, international world wide web conferences steering
committee, pp 517-524

Tsui D (2017) Predicting stock price movement using social media analy-
sis. Technical Report. Stanford University, Technical Report

Tzortzis G, Likas A (2007) Deep belief networks for spam filtering. In:
19th IEEE international conference on tools with artificial intel-
ligence (ICTAI 2007), IEEE, pp 306—309

Van Merriénboer B, Bahdanau D, Dumoulin V, Serdyuk D, Warde-Farley
D, Chorowski J, Bengio Y (2015) Blocks and fuel: frameworks for
deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1506.00619

Vartapetiance A, Gillam L (2014) Deception detection: dependable or
defective? Soc Netw Anal Min 4:166

Vlachos A, Riedel S (2014) Fact checking: Task definition and dataset
construction. In: Proceedings of the ACL 2014 workshop on lan-
guage technologies and computational social science, pp 18—22

Vo NN, He X, Liu S, Xu G (2019) Deep learning for decision making and
the optimization of socially responsible investments and portfolio.
Decis Support Syst 124:113097

Vo NN, Liu S, He X, Xu G (2018) Multimodal mixture density boost-
ing network for personality mining. In: Pacific-Asia conference
on knowledge discovery and data mining, Springer. pp 644-655

Wang D, Irani D, Pu C (2011) A social-spam detection framework. In:
Proceedings of the 8th annual collaboration, electronic messaging,
anti-abuse and Spam conference, pp 46—54

Wang N, Yeung DY (2013) Learning a deep compact image representa-
tion for visual tracking. In: Advances in neural information process-
ing systems, pp 809-817

Wang W, Zhang F, Luo X, Zhang S (2019) Pdrcnn: precise phishing
detection with recurrent convolutional neural networks. Secur
Commun Netw 9:72

Wang WY (2017) “ liar, liar pants on fire’: a new benchmark dataset for
fake news detection. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1705.00648

Wang Y, Ma F, Jin Z, Yuan Y, Xun G, Jha K, Su L, Gao J (2018) Eann:
Event adversarial neural networks for multi-modal fake news detec-
tion. In: Proceedings of the 24th ACM sigkdd international confer-
ence on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp 849-857

Page 19o0f20 82

Wei L, Gao D, Luo C (2018) False data injection attacks detection with
deep belief networks in smart grid. In: 2018 Chinese automation
congress (CAC), IEEE, pp 2621-2625

Wei W, Wan X (2017) Learning to identify ambiguous and misleading
news headlines. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1705.0603 1

Willmore A (xxxx) This analysis shows how viral fake election news
stories outperformed real news on facebook

Wu L, Li J, Hu X, Liu H (2017) Gleaning wisdom from the past: Early
detection of emerging rumors in social media. In: Proceedings of
the 2017 SIAM international conference on data mining, SIAM,
pp 99-107

Wu L, Morstatter F, Carley KM, Liu H (2019) Misinformation in social
media: definition, manipulation, and detection. ACM SIGKDD
Explor Newslett 21:80—90

Wu L, Rao Y, Yu H, Wang Y, Nazir A (2018) False information detection
on social media via a hybrid deep model. In: International confer-
ence on social informatics, Springer, pp 323-333

Xu Y, Wang C, Dan Z, Sun S, Dong F (2019) Deep recurrent neural
network and data filtering for rumor detection on sina weibo. Sym-
metry 11:1408

Yang Y, Zheng L, Zhang J, Cui Q, Li Z, Yu PS (2018) Ti-cnn: Convo-
lutional neural networks for fake news detection. arXiv preprint
arXiv: 1806.00749

Yenala H, Jhanwar A, Chinnakotla MK, Goyal J (2018) Deep learning
for detecting inappropriate content in text. Int J Data Sci Anal
6:273—286

Yepes AJ, MacKinlay A, Bedo J, Garvani R, Chen Q (2014) Deep belief
networks and biomedical text categorisation. In: Proceedings of
the Australasian language technology association. Workshop, pp
123-127

Yilmaz CM, Durahim AO (2018) Spr2ep: a semi-supervised spam review
detection framework. In: 2018 IEEE/ACM international conference
on advances in social networks analysis and mining (ASONAM),
TEEE, pp 306-313

Yin J, Zhou Z, Liu S, Wu Z, Xu G (2018) Social spammer detection: a
multi-relational embedding approach. In: Pacific-Asia conference
on knowledge discovery and data mining, Springer, pp 615-627

Yin J, Li Q, Liu S, Wu Z, Xu G (2020) Leveraging Multi-level Depend-
ency of Relational Sequences for Social Spammer Detection.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.0623 1

Young T, Hazarika D, Poria S, Cambria E (2018) Recent trends in deep
learning based natural language processing. In: IEEE computa-
tional intelligence magazine, vol 13, pp 55—75

Yu F, Liu Q, Wu S, Wang L, Tan T et al. (2017a) A convolutional
approach for misinformation identification

Yu S, Li M, Liu F (2017b) Rumor identification with maximum entropy
in micronet. Complexity 2017

Zhang H, Alim MA, Li X, Thai MT, Nguyen HT (2016) Misinformation
in online social networks: detect them all with a limited budget.
ACM Trans Inf Syst 34:1—24

Zhang H, Kuhnle A, Smith JD, Thai MT (2018a) Fight under uncer-
tainty: Restraining misinformation and pushing out the truth. In:
2018 IEEE/ACM international conference on advances in social
networks analysis and mining (ASONAM), IEEE, pp 266-273

Zhang J, Cui L, Fu Y, Gouza FB (2018b) Fake news detection with deep
diffusive network model. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1805.08751

Zhang Q, Lipani A, Liang S, Yilmaz E (2019) Reply-aided detection of
misinformation via bayesian deep learning. In: The world wide web
conference, pp 2333-2343

Zhang Q, Zhang S, Dong J, Xiong J, Cheng X (2015) Automatic detection
of rumor on social network. In: Natural language processing and
Chinese computing. Springer, pp 113-122

Zhang W, Du Y, Yoshida T, Wang Q (2018c) Dri-rcnn: an approach to
deceptive review identification using recurrent convolutional neural
network. Inf Process Manag 54:576—592

Q) Springer
82 Page 20 of 20

Zhang Y, Salakhutdinov R, Chang HA, Glass J (2012) Resource config-
urable spoken query detection using deep boltzmann machines.
In: 2012 IEEE international conference on acoustics. Speech and
signal processing (ICASSP), IEEE, pp 5161-5164

Zhao J, Cao N, Wen Z, Song Y, Lin YR, Collins C (2014) Fluxflow: vis-
ual analysis of anomalous information spreading on social media.
IEEE Trans Visual Comput Graphics 20:1773-1782

Zhao Z, Resnick P, Mei Q (2015) Enquiring minds: Early detection of
rumors in social media from enquiry posts. In: Proceedings of the
24th international conference on world wide web, pp 1395-1405

Zhou C, Sun C, Liu Z, Lau F (2015) A c-lstm neural network for text
classification. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1511.08630

Zubiaga A, Aker A, Bontcheva K, Liakata M, Procter R (2018) Detection
and resolution of rumours in social media: a survey. ACM Comput
Surv 51:1-36

Q) Springer

Social Network Analysis and Mining (2020) 10:82

Zubiaga A, Kochkina E, Liakata M, Procter R, Lukasik M (2016a) Stance
classification in rumours as a sequential task exploiting the tree struc-
ture of social media conversations. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1609.09028

Zubiaga A, Liakata M, Procter R (2017) Exploiting context for rumour
detection in social media. In: International conference on social
informatics, Springer, pp 109-123

Zubiaga A, Liakata M, Procter R, Ho1 GWS, Tolmie P (2016b) Analysing
how people orient to and spread rumours in social media by look-
ing at conversational threads. PLoS ONE 11:e0150989

Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
