Np} | Digital Medicine

COMMENT OPEN

www.nature.com/npjdigitalmed

® Check for updates

What do medical students actually need to know about

artificial intelligence?

Liam G. McCoy@'*™, Sujay Nagaraj®'”, Felipe Morgado @'“, Vinyas Harish @'”, Sunit Das’? and Leo Anthony Celi@””*

With emerging innovations in artificial intelligence (Al) poised to substantially impact medical practice, interest in training current
and future physicians about the technology is growing. Alongside comes the question of what, precisely, should medical students
be taught. While competencies for the clinical usage of Al are broadly similar to those for any other novel technology, there are
qualitative differences of critical importance to concerns regarding explainability, health equity, and data security. Drawing on
experiences at the University of Toronto Faculty of Medicine and MIT Critical Data’s “datathons”, the authors advocate for a dual-
focused approach: combining robust data science-focused additions to baseline health research curricula and extracurricular

programs to cultivate leadership in this space.

npj Digital Medicine (2020)3:86; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-020-0294-7

INTRODUCTION

With emerging innovations in artificial intelligence (Al) poised to
substantially impact medical practice, interest in training current
and future physicians about Al is growing’. Alongside this interest
comes the question of what, precisely, medical students should
learn’. While competencies for the clinical usage of Al are broadly
similar to those for any other novel technology in medicine, there
are qualitative differences of critical importance to concerns
regarding explainability, health equity, and data security>°. We
advocate for a dual-focused approach: combining robust, learner-
centered Al additions to baseline curricula and extracurricular
programs to cultivate leadership in this space.

WHAT DO PHYSICIANS NEED TO UNDERSTAND ABOUT AI IN
THE CLINICAL CONTEXT?

Most directly, physicians need to understand Al in the same way
that they need to understand any technology impacting clinical
decision-making. A physician utilizing MRI, for example, does not
need to understand the particle spin physics differentiating T1 and
T2 weighted scans, but they do need to be able to:

(i) Use it—identify when the technology is appropriate for a
given clinical context, and what inputs are required to
receive meaningful results.

(ii) Interpret it—understand and interpret the results with a
reasonable degree of accuracy, including awareness of
sources of error, bias, or clinical inapplicability.

(iii) Explain it—be able to communicate the results and the
processes underlying them in a way that others (e.g. allied
health professionals and patients) can understand.

These skills take on particular nuances in the context of Al. For
(i) and (ii), it is critical for physicians to appreciate the highly
context-specific nature of Al, and the fact that performance in a

single restricted context may not always be transferable. It is also
important to be aware of factors which may decrease the
performance of algorithms for specific patient groups”.

Al has been commonly criticized for the “black box” effect—that
is, the mechanism by which a model arrives at a decision may be
indecipherable’. This lack of technical “explainability”, however,
does not discharge the obligations of (iii). To satisfy requirements
of informed consent and clinical collaboration, a physician may be
called upon to communicate their understanding of the origin,
nature, and justification of an algorithm’s results to patients,
families, and colleagues.

WHAT DO PHYSICIANS NEED TO UNDERSTAND ABOUT AI IN
THE BROADER PROFESSIONAL CONTEXT?

The professional obligations of physicians extend beyond the
clinical role into leadership and health advocacy. The disruptive
prospects of Al in healthcare raise significant ethical and
operational challenges which physicians must collectively be
prepared to engage with for the sake of ensuring patient welfare.

Substantial concerns exist regarding the impact of algorithmic
clinical decision support on health equity, due to factors such as
the use of datasets lacking representation from minority popula-
tions’, and the possibility for algorithms to learn from and
perpetuate existing biases’. Risks around data security and privacy
are also becoming rapidly apparent?. There is also, however, the
potential for Al itself to alleviate some of medicine’s existing
problems with bias and unfairness®. Physicians should be aware of
both possibilities and be equipped to advocate for the develop-
ment and deployment of ethical and equitable systems. Finally,
physicians must act as responsible stewards for patient data to
ensure that the foundational trust between provider and patient is
not violated.

‘Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Medical Sciences Building, 1 King’s College Cir, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada. 7Institute of Health Policy, Management and
Evaluation, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, 155 College St 4th Floor, Toronto, ON M5T 3M6, Canada. *Department of Computer Science, University of
Toronto, 40 St. George Street, Room 4283, Toronto, ON M5S 2E4, Canada. “Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, 101 College St, Suite 15-701, Toronto, ON
M5G 1L7, Canada. °Centre for Ethics, University of Toronto, 15 Devonshire Pl, Toronto, ON M5S 1H8, Canada. “Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, E25-505, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. “Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, 330 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA. ®Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 677 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
email: liam.mccoy@mail.utoronto.ca

np} nature partner

Scripps Research Translational Institute journals
L.G. McCoy et al.

 

HOW MIGHT MEDICAL STUDENTS LEARN WHAT THEY NEED
TO LEARN?

Concerted efforts should be taken to cultivate physician-leaders
who are fluent in both Al and medicine. Such dual competence is
important, as it is no simple task to select clinically relevant and
computationally feasible targets for Al in medicine. A siloed
approach may lead to clear clinical targets going unnoticed and
worsen the production of technical “solutions in search of
problems””. A multidisciplinary, integrated approach to learning
will serve to facilitate this goal.

When approaching such a complex topic, it is critical to distinguish
between that which all physicians must know for everyday practice,
and that which some physicians should know to drive innovation.
Curricular components should be targeted to address the former,
while robust extracurricular programs can be targeted toward the
latter. Both components serve to promote discussions on how the
convergence between Al and medicine is currently impacting and will
continue to impact the physician’s identity. This aligns with the
concept of the “reimagined medical school”, which establishes a
framework of core knowledge while supporting students who seek
deep dives into specific subject areas”.

This approach has been piloted at the University of Toronto (UofT)
Faculty of Medicine and has been embraced by administration as an
important part of the Faculty’s strategic plan®. Lectures in the
preclinical curriculum introduce all students to these concepts, and
the 2-year-long “Computing for Medicine” certificate program

provides particularly interested students with practical programming
skills and immersion into clinical data science projects’. Additionally,
an “Al in Medicine” student interest group hosts extracurricular
seminars on the subject and helps to facilitate connections between
medical students and a city’s broader Al ecosystem (in academia
and industry) (see Supplementary Table 1 for a list of Al in Medicine
offerings in the last two years).

Harvard Medical School has engaged in a similar approach,
offering clinical informatics training as an elective for medical
students'°. During this elective, students are paired with faculty
mentors in their area of interest and engage in a mix of didactic and
hands-on learning to explore how informatics is embedded into
health systems. The School has also collaborated with the MIT
Critical Data group to offer a project-based course on data science in
medicine''. Extracurricularly, the MIT Critical Data Group has worked
to spur interest in Al through “datathons” (brief competitions
wherein computer scientists and clinicians work together to use
data to solve clinical problems)'*. These collaborations are emble-
matic of the possibilities for collaboration with non-medical faculties
to enrich the education of medical students.

With insight from these experiences, we identify a series of
important opportunities in both the curricular and extracurricular
realms (outlined in Table 1). We wish to emphasize the
importance of finding synergy between the learning objectives
and their delivery, and of maintaining a learner-centered ethos
with a focus upon student engagement rather than passive

Table 1.

Curricular objective

Delivery recommendations

Potential curricular and extracurricular learning opportunities for artificial intelligence in medicine.

Extracurricular objective

Delivery recommendations

 

Promote physicians to be data-savvy
consumers

Students should be able to critically
evaluate Al claims and understand
the connection between models
and clinical realities.

Instill durable fundamental concepts
about Al, while avoiding technical
specifics

It is more important for students to
have a robust conceptual
understanding of Al and the
structure of clinical data science
than to understand constantly
changing technical specifics.

Introduce frameworks for
approaching ethical considerations,
both clinically and at a systems level
Students should appreciate fairness,
accountability, and transparency as
core Al analogues to the traditional
bioethics principles of beneficence,
non-maleficence, autonomy, and
justice’.

Promote computer science/data
science as a dual-training path for
MD/PhD and MD/MSc students
Students should be provided with
partnered, formalized learning
opportunities that provide training
at the intersection of health and
data science.

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 86

Actively engage students with hands-
on workshops focused around:
Recognizing appropriate potential
applications of Al to health data
Understanding how to discern
between different methods that can be
applied to data (e.g. the distinction
between prediction and causal
inference approaches)

Incorporate lecture and self-learning
module content around:

The basic pipeline of data acquisition,
cleaning, analysis, and visualization
Issues with data stewardship and data
quality assurance in healthcare.
Classes of machine learning
approaches and common issues with
design and integration of Al into
clinical practice

Students should participate in
interactive case-based workshops and
seminars lead by Al and ethics experts
focused on:

The special considerations Al requires
at clinical and system levels in a case-
based format

How fairness, accountability, and
transparency directly relate to core
clinical values of beneficence, non-
maleficence, autonomy, and justice
which must permeate through all
aspects of their care

Establish partnerships with institutes
across computer science, biomedical
engineering, the basic sciences, and
public health, such as:

U of T Faculty of Medicine's
partnerships with the Vector Institute
for Artificial Intelligence, and Schwartz
Reisman Institute for Technology and
Society

Harvard Medical School's Collaborative
Health Sciences and Technology MD/
PhD Offerings with MIT

Promote student interest groups in Al
Interested students should be
encouraged to connect and build
networks around their shared

Al focus.

Facilitate connections between
medical students and industry in the
health-Al space

As Al in medicine is not siloed to
solely academia or industry, students
should have the opportunity to be
exposed to the Al ecosystem in their
local and broader communities

Provide longitudinal programs to
give students hands-on experience
with real-world Al projects
Theoretical knowledge should be
supplemented with practical, real-
world experience through formalized
programs.

Encourage cross-disciplinary
collaborations between medical
students and data scientists
Students should build
interdisciplinary networks, and be
encouraged to connect and
collaborate with peers across
faculties

Extend the broadly-used format of the
“student interest group” to Al, enabling
students to organize and
autonomously host initiatives such as:
Seminar events with prominent Al in
Medicine speakers

Hackathons and datathons in
collaboration with computer science
and engineering students

Leverage partnerships (either at the
Faculty level or the student group
level) to offer:

Student site visits to start-ups to learn
about entrepreneurship and the
creation of health Al products and
services

Student research opportunities with
health Al companies, or public-private
partnerships

Longitudinal programs can include but
are not limited to:

“Computing for Medicine’ a validated
14-week course offered to preclinical
students in UofT’s MD program to
promote computer literacy, algorithmic
thinking, and cross-domain
collaboration?

Non-technical projects involving Al or
data science, such as using design-
thinking approaches to implement
existing Al tools into clinical practice
and workflows

Take active steps to break past
disciplinary silos through initiatives
such as:

Shared “Al in Medicine” journal clubs
open to both medical students and
computer science/engineering
students

Collaborative events such as
“datathons’ wherein ad-hoc
interdisciplinary teams compete to
answer clinical questions on open
database

 

Scripps Research Translational Institute
knowledge transfer. These concepts should be integrated with
other aspects of the curriculum wherever appropriate (such as
the inclusion of an Al case study in a workshop about ethical
clinical decision-making), as the competencies required to
effectively work with Al will often overlap with those required
to fulfil other core aspects of the physician role such as advocacy,
leadership, and communication. Medical schools have a critical
role to play not only in helping their students learn but also in
nurturing their academic interests and sowing the seeds of
future leadership. These recommendations can and should be
tailored to the context and strengths of each medical school, its
partnerships, and its student body.

WHAT ABOUT AFTER MEDICAL SCHOOL?

While detailed discussion on postgraduate medical education
(PGME) and continuing medical education (CME) is outside the
scope of this work, it is important to consider that medical
education is viewed as a life-long pursuit and attention needs to
be provided to learners at later career stages'*. Competencies
around Al could be integrated in PGME curricula in existing
research or Quality Improvement (QI) blocks. Research training, for
medical or surgical trainees, could be in technical areas such as
data science or biomedical engineering but also in ethics, health
services research, and medical education. QI would focus on
translating and evaluating proven innovations into care. CME
offerings through online or in-person workshops can not only
allow clinicians to refresh their competencies over the course of
their career but also empower established practitioners with the
skills and knowledge to keep up with this field'*. The various
curricular aspects in Table 1 can be modified to suit learners at
different stages in their careers.

CONCLUSION

Ultimately, medical schools are tasked with training physicians for
a future in which artificial intelligence is poised to play a
significant role. In order to succeed at this task, it will be essential
for students to have curricular and extracurricular learning
opportunities around the clinical usage, technical limitations,
and ethical implications of the tools at their disposal. Given the
importance and potential impact of this technology, we must act
both to ensure a base of artificial intelligence literacy among
physicians at-large and to nurture the skills and interests of the
future leaders who will drive innovation in this space.

Received: 26 January 2020; Accepted: 26 May 2020;
Published online: 19 June 2020

REFERENCES

1. Topol, E. J. High-performance medicine: the convergence of human and artificial
intelligence. Nat. Med. 25, 44-56 (2019).

2. Wartman, S. A. The empirical challenge of 21st-century medical education. Aca-
demic Med. 94, 1412-1415 (2019).

3. Adamson, A. S. & Smith, A. Machine learning and health care disparities in der-
matology. JAMA Dermatol 154, 1247-1248 (2018).

4. Parikh, R. B., Teeple, S. & Navathe, A. S. Addressing bias in artificial intelligence in
health care. JAMA. http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2756196.
(2019)

5. Price, W. N. & Cohen, I. G. Privacy in the age of medical big data. Nat. Med. 25,
37-43 (2019).

6. Chen, I. Y., Joshi, S. & Ghassemi, M. Treating health disparities with artificial
intelligence. Nat. Med. 26, 16-17 (2020).

7. Wiens, J. et al. Do no harm: a roadmap for responsible machine learning for
health care. Nat. Med. 25, 1337-1340 (2019).

Scripps Research Translational Institute

L.G. McCoy et al.

 

8. Prober, C. G. & Khan, S. Medical education reimagined: a call to action. Acad. Med.
88, 1407-1410 (2013).

9. Law, M., Veinot, P., Campbell, J., Craig, M. & Mylopoulos, M. Computing for
medicine: can we prepare medical students for the future? Acad. Med. 94, 353
(2019).

10. Harvard Medical School Course Catalogue. PD530.7 Clinical Informatics. http://
www.medcatalog.harvard.edu/coursedetails.aspx?cid=PD530.7&did=260&yid=
2020&fbclid=IlwAR3FRGDGVFK4ca_wHGGnXBwf3zRLkN8LMiJXBph1 q3tFc_g3-
ZAVT5gK1qAl (2020).

11. MIT Critical Data. 2019.HST.953: Collaborative Data Science in Medicine. https://
criticaldata.mit.edu/blog/201 9/08/06/hst-953-2019/. (2020).

12. Aboab, J. et al. A “datathon” model to support cross-disciplinary collaboration. Sci.
Transl. Med. 8, 333ps8 (2016).

13. Aschenbrener, C. A., Ast, C. & Kirch, D. G. Graduate medical education: its role in
achieving a true medical education continuum. Acad. Med. 90, 1203-1209
(2015).

14. McMahon, G. T. The leadership case for investing in continuing professional
development. Acad. Med. 92, 1075-1077 (2017).

15. Floridi, L. et al. Al4People—an ethical framework for a good Al society: oppor-
tunities, risks, principles, and recommendations. Minds Mach. 28, 689-707 (2018).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to acknowledge the Faculty of Medicine, MD Program, and Medical
Society at the University of Toronto for their support and commitment to Al in
Medicine Students’ Society and other initiatives driven by students in service of our
profession and its changing needs. L.A.C. is funded by the National Institute of Health
through the NIBIB RO1 grant EBO17205.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Initial conceptions and design: L.G.M, S.N., V.H., F.M. L.A.C. Drafting of the paper: L.G.
M., S.N., V.H., F.M. Critical revision of the paper for important intellectual content: L.G.
M., S.N., V.H., F.M., S.D., L.A.C. All authors approve the submitted version of the paper
and have agreed to be personally accountable for both their own contributions and
the accuracy and integrity of the overall work.

COMPETING INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing interests

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
$41746-020-0294-7.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to L.G.M.

Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons

7 Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.

© The Author(s) 2020

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 86
