-)

J Vis (2020) 23:1015-1034 Chen for
https://doi.org/10.1007/s 12650-020-00684-5 updates

REGULAR PAPER

Kostiantyn Kucher@® - Rafael M. Martins® - Carita Paradis® - Andreas Kerren®

StanceVis Prime: visual analysis of sentiment
and stance in social media texts

Received: 12 February 2020/ Revised: 25 May 2020/ Accepted: 16 June 2020/Published online: 25 August 2020
© The Author(s) 2020

Abstract Text visualization and visual text analytics methods have been successfully applied for various
tasks related to the analysis of individual text documents and large document collections such as summa-
rization of main topics or identification of events in discourse. Visualization of sentiments and emotions
detected in textual data has also become an important topic of interest, especially with regard to the data
originating from social media. Despite the growing interest in this topic, the research problem related to
detecting and visualizing various stances, such as rudeness or uncertainty, has not been adequately
addressed by the existing approaches. The challenges associated with this problem include the development
of the underlying computational methods and visualization of the corresponding multi-label stance classi-
fication results. In this paper, we describe our work on a visual analytics platform, called StanceVis Prime,
which has been designed for the analysis of sentiment and stance in temporal text data from various social
media data sources. The use case scenarios intended for StanceVis Prime include social media monitoring
and research in sociolinguistics. The design was motivated by the requirements of collaborating domain
experts in linguistics as part of a larger research project on stance analysis. Our approach involves con-
suming documents from several text stream sources and applying sentiment and stance classification,
resulting in multiple data series associated with source texts. Stance Vis Prime provides the end users with an
overview of similarities between the data series based on dynamic time warping analysis, as well as detailed
visualizations of data series values. Users can also retrieve and conduct both distant and close reading of the
documents corresponding to the data series. We demonstrate our approach with case studies involving
political targets of interest and several social media data sources and report preliminary user feedback
received from a domain expert.

Keywords Stance visualization - Sentiment visualization - Text visualization - Stance analysis -
Sentiment analysis - Opinion mining - Visualization - Interaction - NLP - Text analytics

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (https://doi.org/10.1007/s12650-020-00684-5) contains
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

K. Kucher ()) - R. M. Martins - A. Kerren
Department of Computer Science and Media Technology, Linnaeus University, Vaxj6, Sweden
E-mail: kostiantyn.kucher @Inu.se

C. Paradis
Centre for Languages and Literature, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
1016 K. Kucher et al.

1 Introduction

The recent years have demonstrated how massively available digital communication channels, such as social
media, affect world politics and shape the agenda in multiple spheres of life. The understanding of phe-
nomena occurring in the corresponding data is therefore interesting and important for decision makers,
researchers, and the general public. Some of the most interesting aspects of human communication to
analyze in such data are related to various expressions of subjectivity in social media document texts, such
as sentiments, opinions, and emotions (Pang and Lee 2008; Mohammad 2016; Zhang et al. 2018). The
analysis of stance-taking in texts (Englebretson 2007) can provide even further insights about the subjective
position of the speaker, for instance, AGREEMENT Or DISAGREEMENT with a certain topic (Chen and Ku 2016;
Mohammad et al. 2016, 2017), or expression of CERTAINTY and PREDICTION (Simaki et al. 2017).

However, the manual analysis of texts and the manual examination of raw output of computational text
analyses do not scale up to the amount of data produced by social media, which can range from hundreds to
millions of messages per day, depending on the topic or target of interest. Besides the traditional close
reading task, support for distant reading (Janicke et al. 2015) is required to make sense of such data.
Information visualization and visual analytics approaches have been therefore applied successfully to
address this challenge for social media data (Chen et al. 2017). In particular, text visualization (Kucher and
Kerren 2015) and visual text analytics (Liu et al. 2019) methods can support various tasks related to the
analysis of individual text documents and large document collections such as summarization of main topics
or identification of events in discourse (Dou and Liu 2016), using the techniques developed for time-
oriented data visualization (Aigner et al. 2011), when necessary.

Visualization of sentiments and emotions detected in textual data has also become an important topic of
interest in the visualization community (Kucher et al. 2018a). Multiple existing sentiment visualization
techniques address the tasks of visualizing polarity (Cao et al. 2012), opinions (Wu et al. 2014, 2010), and
emotions (Zhao et al. 2014) detected in text data. However, the related task of stance visualization has not
enjoyed the same level of support by the existing approaches so far. One of the main challenges of stance
visualization compared to sentiment visualization is related to the need to accommodate the visual design to
(1) a specific definition of stance and (2) a data format produced by (3) a specific computational method,
which are all decided on by the users (for instance, domain experts in computational linguistics). Several
existing techniques support stance visualization for temporal text data to a certain extent; however, they
either make use of a very limited set of stance categories/aspects (Diakopoulos et al. 2014; El-Assady et al.
2016; Kucher et al. 2016), or interpret such categories as mutually exclusive (Martins et al. 2017). Visu-
alization of multiple non-exclusive stance categories at the same time (e.g., produced as an output of a
multi-label rather than multi-class classification task) for social media texts is, thus, still an open challenge.

      

- positivity tae EL <.

- negativity “*., f ry a
. et )
Sse oa | Utterance

A A a Sentiment classifier | classification results |
Streaming social Text documents ‘

E :
i Classification jhe ven ead! |
media data source ~~ eel,
a \ Ca a queue 7 —» ip
m ' Derived

. Twitter tweets

 
 

 

oli
interest DB Data series 12 stance categories

7 similarity Dataseries | Document lists (contrast, prediction, ...)
. a (DR & DTW vis) — values vis and text views
- keywords 2 2 2
/ mS One & * \

Stance classifier data series

*
*
a al
Be innmnn mann nnnnnnnnnnnnen
*
*

 
  

- subforums

   

Streaming social Text documents

media data source “e, Frontend
, comments

"Reddit

Fig. 1 Overview of our approach: (1) the data from several streaming text sources is tracked according to the list of targets of
interest and saved into a database; (2) the retrieved documents are processed with sentiment and stance classifiers at the
utterance/sentence level; (3) the classification result counts are used to produce multiple data series; and (4) the user is provided
with means for visual analysis of text and time data via interactive visual representations
StanceVis Prime: visual analysis of sentiment 1017

In this paper [based on our previous poster abstract, see Kucher et al. (2018b)], we present our work on a
visual analytics platform, called StanceVis Prime, which has been designed to support visual analysis of
sentiment and stance in temporal text data from social media. Our approach was developed in collaboration
with domain experts in linguistics as part of a larger research project on stance analysis titled StaViCTA.
Thus, our work follows the definition of stance categories defined by the linguists and uses a custom
classifier for 12 stance categories developed by the collaborating experts in computational linguistics.

Compared to the existing works on stance visualization, our approach aims to support the following (see
Fig. 1):

consumption of data from several social media sources;
classification of both sentiment polarity and multiple non-exclusive stance categories at the utterance/
sentence level;

e visual analysis of data series for various sentiment and stance categories at multiple levels of granularity,
including both values and similarity between the series; and

e support for distant and close reading of corresponding text document sets augmented with multi-label
classification results, including export of document lists processed and annotated by the users.

The main scientific contributions of this paper are the following:

e an analysis of the workflow and user tasks related to visual analysis of sentiment and stance in social
media texts;

e adesign study involving temporal and textual data analysis methods in order to represent sentiment and
Stance; and

e a visual analytics solution supporting exploratory analysis of sentiment and stance classification results
for temporal text data from multiple sources.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we briefly introduce the necessary
background information on sentiment and stance analysis, and then we discuss the related work relevant to
our text and time data visualization approaches. Section 3 presents the analysis of the workflow and user
tasks guiding our design. We briefly describe the overall architecture of our implementation in Sect. 4 and
then discuss our design decisions for the visualization components in Sect. 5. We demonstrate our approach
with several case studies in Sect. 6 and discuss preliminary user feedback as well as some other aspects of
our work in Sect. 7. Finally, we conclude this paper and outline the directions for future work in Sect. 8.

2 Background and related work

In order to highlight the existing approaches for sentiment and stance visualization, we should at first briefly
discuss the underlying computational methods. We also outline the existing time-varying data visualization
techniques relevant to our visual analysis workflow.

2.1 Sentiment and stance analysis

Sentiment analysis is a well-established task in computational linguistics, which has traditionally been
applied for the analysis of customer reviews and, later, in social media analytics. The existing surveys (Pang
and Lee 2008; Mohammad 2016; Zhang et al. 2018) describe a multitude of existing approaches for
sentiment classification at various levels of granularity, from words to complete documents, and with
various categories, from POSITIVE/NEUTRAL/NEGATIVE to multidimensional emotion models. For our purposes,
the detection of POSITIVE and NEGATIVE sentiment at the level of utterances/sentences in written text data is
sufficient. We have used an existing rule-based classifier called VADER (Hutto and Gilbert 2014) designed
for short social media texts in our work. We use the information about utterances with normalized PosITIvITY
and/or NEGATIVITY scores above a certain threshold (currently set to 0.3), and consider the rest as NEUTRAL
with regard to sentiment. Our approach is not specific to VADER, though, and could use a better performing
deep learning classifier (Lai et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2018) in the future to achieve better classification
quality/performance.

In contrast to sentiment, stance-taking has been studied in linguistics (Biber and Finegan 1989;
Englebretson 2007; Glynn and Sjolin 2014) with regard to the subjective position of the speaker that might
not imply POSITIVE/NEGATIVE polarity or other emotions. The existing computational approaches usually focus
ON AGREEMENT OF DISAGREEMENT On a certain topic (Chen and Ku 2016; Mohammad et al. 2016, 2017), and
1018 K. Kucher et al.

only a few works take a wider view of stance aspects/categories into account, such as NECESSITY and VOLITION
(Simaki et al. 2017). In this work, we follow the approach taken in our interdisciplinary project, where the
researchers in linguistics defined the stance categories of interest (see Table |) and the experts in compu-
tational linguistics implemented a custom stance classifier (Skeppstedt et al. 2016b, 2017). Classification is
carried out at the utterance level in a multi-label fashion, 1.e., one utterance can be labeled with multiple
stance categories simultaneously. Classification results are used for further analysis and visualization.

2.2 Sentiment and stance visualization

Sentiment and stance visualization problems can be treated as part of a more general text visualization
(Kucher and Kerren 2015) field. The existing techniques addressing its various tasks and aspects are covered
by several surveys, including the works on topic- and time-oriented visual text analytics (Dou and Liu
2016), techniques supporting close and distant reading (Janicke et al. 2015), social media visual analytics
(Chen et al. 2017), and visual text mining (Liu et al. 2019). More specifically, the existing sentiment
visualization techniques are discussed in a recent survey (Kucher et al. 2018a), including, among others,
multiple approaches that support sentiment visualization in temporal text data: for example, Whisper (Cao
et al. 2012) visualizes polarity of tweets as part of a real-time Twitter monitoring task; OpinionFlow (Wu
et al. 2014) indicates the polarity of public opinions on particular topics; PEARL (Zhao et al. 2014)
represents the emotions detected in tweets by an individual user over time with a stacked graph; SocialHelix
(Cao et al. 2015) focuses on the visual analysis of sentiment divergence between the user communities
extracted from Twitter data, represented visually with a helix-like visual metaphor; and IdeaFlow (Wang
et al. 2016a) supports visualization of sentiment towards specific ideas, which are identified in temporal text
data and represented with flow maps.

Several approaches are also relevant to the stance visualization task, e.g., Lingoscope (Diakopoulos et al.
2014) visualizes the language use of acceptors and sceptics of a certain topic in blogs. ConToVi (El-Assady
et al. 2016) supports visualization of debate transcripts using categories beyond sentiment, such as CER-
TAINTY, ELOQUENCE, and POLITENESS. Our previous approach uVSAT (Kucher et al. 2016) focuses on data
series based on the markers of sentiment, emotions, and stance categories such as CERTAINTY and UNCER-
TAINTY in blogs and forums. All of these works make use of only a limited number of stance-related
categories. ALVA (Kucher et al. 2017) overcomes this limitation, but focuses on data annotation and
classifier training stages rather than on analyses of data sets collected from social media over time. Another
relevant approach is StanceXplore (Martins et al. 2017), which supports visualization of multiple stance
categories detected in social media data, however, (1) it treats such categories in a mutually exclusive way
for visualization purposes, (2) it does not support sentiment analysis and visualization, and (3) it is limited to
the data from a single data source (Twitter). Regarding this last limitation, support for visual comparison of
text data from several data sources was previously demonstrated by the approaches such as TopicPanorama
(Wang et al. 2016b) for the purposes of topic analysis, but not for stance analysis. In contrast to the existing
works, our contribution discussed in this paper is designed specifically for visual analysis of multiple non-
exclusive stance categories as well as sentiment categories in the data from several social media sources.

2.3 Visualization of time-varying data
One of the tasks of our work is to represent the change of public sentiment and stance over time (Aigner

et al. 2011). ThemeRiver (Havre et al. 2000) is a classic example of temporal text data visualization, which
uses a stacked area graph metaphor (Byron and Wattenberg 2008) to represent a flow of themes/topics

Table 1 Data categories used in our work

Type Categories Description
General Document Count #documents detected in the source data for a target
of interest
Sentiment POSITIVITY, NEGATIVITY #occurrences of sentiment in utterances detected
with VADER (Hutto and Gilbert 2014)
Stance AGREEMENT, CERTAINTY, CONCESSION & CONTRARINESS, #occurrences of stance in utterances detected with a
CONTRAST, DISAGREEMENT, HYPOTHETICALS, NEED & custom stance classifier (Skeppstedt et al.

REQUIREMENT, PREDICTION, RUDENESS, SOURCE OF KNOWLEDGE, 2016b, 2017)
TACT, UNCERTAINTY
StanceVis Prime: visual analysis of sentiment 1019

detected in text data. In a similar fashion, Dork et al. (2010) use a stacked graph to represent topics in the
streaming Twitter data, and TextFlow (Cui et al. 2011) combines a stacked graph with glyphs and line plots
to represent topic evolution. RankExplorer (Shi et al. 2012) uses a stacked graph to support exploration of
rank changes over time in sets of time series. MultiStream (Cuenca et al. 2018) adapts ThemeRiver to
support interactive exploration of hierarchies of multiple time series using a nonlinear time axis. Our work
also uses a stacked graph metaphor augmented with additional cue labels representing sentiment and stance
data, as discussed in Sect. 5.3.

The analysis of multiple data series may focus on the task of finding similarities in how the series
develop through time. In such cases, similarity computations themselves generate sequential data that must
be analyzed, and the main patterns of interest are how similarities between pairs or groups of data series
change and how their relationships evolve through time. Storyline techniques, such as the ones discussed by
Tanahashi and Ma (2012), Liu et al. (2013), and Silvia et al. (2016) visualize each entity in the data as a
timeline that converges (and diverges) with other timelines during periods of more (or less) interaction.
Storygraph by Shrestha et al. (2013) also represents the actors’ dynamics as timelines using the horizontal
time axis, but it focuses on actual spatial distances and movement instead of abstract similarities. Further
possibilities include the approach from SocialHelix (Cao et al. 2015) that highlights the divergence of a pair
of data series by using a helix-like layout with two strands—however, that visualization approach was only
demonstrated for two data series at a time. In order to represent lead-lag relationships between multiple data
objects over time, IdeaFlow (Wang et al. 2016a) uses flow map representations computed by laying out
directed acyclic graphs and then filtering, clustering, and smoothing the resulting visual representation.
However, this approach requires a number of complex computational steps to prepare the input lead-lag
data. While adapting this approach for our task of visual analysis of multiple sentiment and stance data
might be considered as part of future work, we currently focus on a different solution discussed below
instead.

Dimensionality reduction (DR) is an effective technique for the visualization of similarities between
groups of entities, and it has also been applied in the context of time-varying data sets. In the more usual
scenario, where time-varying multidimensional data are projected into 2D and visualized with interactive
scatterplots, possible approaches are to project all time steps at once, then visualize time with trajectories [as
in the work by Bernard et al. (2012)]; or to generate one such 2D projection per time step, then present them
in a sequence, as done by Alencar et al. (2012) and Rauber et al. (2016). Another solution is to project time
steps into 1D, and use one axis (usually the horizontal one) for time. With temporal multidimensional
scaling (TMDS), Jackle et al. (2016) achieve this by arranging (but not explicitly connecting) sequences of
1D MDS projections using the horizontal axis. Crnovrsanin et al. (2009) propose a similar approach, this
time with line segments connecting the time steps of the same series, but, as with Storygraph (Shrestha et al.
2013), this technique focuses on the spatial movement of actors.

Two of our views discussed in Sect. 5.2 are related to these works, with further customizations both in
the underlying algorithm and the presentation. In contrast to the previous work, we use an efficient
implementation (Martins and Kerren 2018) of dynamic time warping (DTW) (Berndt and Clifford 1994;
Esling and Agon 2012) in order to compute meaningful distances between the data series, which are then
used as input for a DR technique that generates 1D and 2D projections at each time step.

3 Requirements analysis

The work described in this paper was carried out as the last stage of an interdisciplinary research project
titled StaViCTA, which was dedicated to stance analysis of written text data. Besides the researchers in
visualization, project members included researchers in linguistics and computational linguistics. These
domain experts provided the definition of stance categories used in our work and developed a multi-label
stance classifier for 12 categories listed in Table 1. As discussed in Sect. 2.1, our collaborators followed an
approach rooted in the research on discourse analysis and stance-taking in linguistics (Simaki et al. 2017) in
order to select a variety of fine-grained aspects of stance, which were used as the foundation for the stance
categories studied within StaViCTA. Our previous visualization contributions within the project supported
the stages of data collection (Kucher et al. 2016) as well as data annotation and active learning for training a
stance classifier (Kucher et al. 2017), among other tasks. As research and development of several versions of
the stance classifier were reaching the completion within the scope of the project (Skeppstedt et al.
2016a, b, 2017), our next goal was set to applying our stance classifier—complemented with a sentiment
1020 K. Kucher et al.

classifier implementation—to large volumes of real-world text data retrieved from streaming data sources.
In order to help users make use of the massive resulting classification data and extract new knowledge
(Sacha et al. 2014) about the sentiment and stance usage in online social media, we have designed the visual
analytic approach described in this paper. Thus, multiple discussions with our project members and our
earlier experiences in the project have laid the foundation for the overall design of our Stance Vis Prime
approach, which is aimed to support exploratory analysis (Tukey 1977) of sentiment and stance in temporal
text data.

Based on interviews with data analysis practitioners, Alspaugh et al. (2019) describe some of the core
exploratory activities as (1) searching for new interesting phenomena, (2) comparing the data to the existing
understanding, and (3) generating new analysis questions or hypotheses. These activities in general fit the
overall requirements provided by our domain experts, who wanted to use an interactive visual analytics tool
to access and explore large amounts of data retrieved from social media.

The overview of the workflow expected from our implementation is illustrated in Fig. 2: users would (1)
start from the aggregated temporal data, (2) identify and select interesting time ranges, (3) retrieve and study
the corresponding sets of documents, and then (4) focus on individual documents. Interested users should
also be able to (5) export filtered and annotated sets of documents for further offline investigation with a
focus on close reading (Janicke et al. 2015) and for presentation/dissemination purposes (Pirolli and Card
2005; Chen et al. 2018). This workflow allows the users interested mostly in textual data to reach the
resulting document texts in a rather straightforward way [“simple is good”—Russell (2016)]. Other users
who are more interested in analyzing trends in social media could focus mostly on temporal data exploration
using coordinated multiple views (Roberts 2007). The concrete list of user tasks for this workflow is as
follows:

T1 Investigate temporal trends in social media data from several data sources/domains for several targets
of interest.

T2 Investigate temporal trends with regard to sentiment and stance data series.

T3 Investigate similarities of multiple data series over time.

T4 Retrieve underlying documents for the specified time ranges for sets of targets/domains.

TS Summarize document sets with regard to text contents and sentiment & stance.

T6 Engage in close reading of the classified text documents.

T7 Export document lists for further offline investigation.

      

a a a ee ee

¢

i
:
(a) Ka)

~ 7

Bes sses

J ee

DB Multiple data series Lists of source Individual
documents document

 

ow

 

a

Exported data
(static HTML files)

Fig. 2 The visual analysis workflow for StanceVis Prime according to the requirements discussed with the domain experts.
The user should be able to conduct interactive analysis of temporal and textual data using the system and export certain textual
data for further offline investigation outside of the scope of the system (denoted with a gray dashed edge)
StanceVis Prime: visual analysis of sentiment 1021

4 Architecture

The backend of StanceVis Prime is designed around a data collection service implemented in Python which
consumes text data streams from several data sources (see Fig. 1). Our implementation currently supports
Twitter and Reddit; however, it could be easily extended to other data sources in the future. There are
multiple targets of interest to be tracked, each defined by a list of key terms and phrases. In addition, the
Reddit data stream is configured to include only comments from subforums relevant to our targets of
interest. The current list of tracked targets focuses mostly on several key political actors, movements, and
events, as these targets are interesting for our domain experts, for instance, European Politics and Brexit.
The retrieved text documents are saved into MongoDB and put on the queue for classification.

Our implementation currently uses the VADER sentiment classifier (Hutto and Gilbert 2014) and a
custom logistic regression-based (Hosmer et al. 2013) stance classifier (Skeppstedt et al. 2016b, 2017)
developed with scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al. 2011) for 12 stance categories listed in Table 1. The stance
classifier was trained on the text data that was (1) collected from blogs and forums, (2) annotated at the
utterance/sentence level as part of the StaViCTA project (Simaki et al. 2017), and (3) later augmented with
token-level annotations by our collaborators (Skeppstedt et al. 2016a) in order to improve the classification
performance compared to the initial utterance-level classification. The data features used for stance clas-
sification are based on vector representations of individual tokens and their neighbors (context words) as
well as their clustering (Skeppstedt et al. 2016b). Our collaborators chose the logistic regression approach as
a standard, well-known alternative that provides quantifiable output for the classification decisions, thus
contributing to the interpretability and eventual trust of the end users (Chatzimparmpas et al. 2020).

In the future, we could replace the classifiers used for specific subsets of categories, for instance, by
using a deep learning-based classifier for AGREEMENT/DISAGREEMENT (Chen and Ku 2016). Alternatively, we
could consider applying ensemble learning techniques (Sagi and Rokach 2018) to improve the classification
performance. The classification occurs at the level of individual utterances/sentences, and the information
about each detected sentiment and stance category is saved into the database alongside the documents. The
stance classifier also reports classification decision confidence, and VADER reports normalized valence
values for positiviry and NEGATIVITY, which are also saved into the database.

The utterance classification results for each combination of target, domain, and category (e.g., Brexit/
Reddit/ PREDICTION) are used to create the corresponding data series at the granularity of one second and
several levels of aggregation (minute, hour, day). The document counts for each target/domain are also
saved as data series to allow the users investigate all of the retrieved text documents, even including the ones
with no sentiment or stance detected. Thus, each data series entry consists of the timestamp, the temporal
granularity level (e.g., one second), the number of detected category cases (sentiment, stance, or document
count) for this timestamp, and the corresponding classification confidence level (for sentiment and stance
categories).

Our visualization frontend comprises a web-based application served with Flask, and it is implemented
in JavaScript with D3 (Bostock 2011) and Rickshaw (Shutterstock Images 2011). Its components are
discussed next.

5 Visualization methodology

In this section, we are going to discuss the design of visual representations used in StanceVis Prime for
various parts of the workflow discussed above. We start with some general considerations affecting multiple
views (cf. Fig. 3) and then discuss the specific data processing and representation concerns in detail. The
supplementary material (Online Resource 1) includes a video demonstration of the visualization frontend of
StanceVis Prime.

5.1 General design considerations

Our visualization approach was required to support multiple data series and text document representations
associated with the classification results for sentiment and stance, as discussed in Sect. 4. This presented us
with multiple design challenges, including the color coding consistency across multiple coordinated views
(Roberts 2007). More specifically, the user could desire to investigate the data for N combinations of targets
of interests and data domains, for instance, Brexit/Reddit, Brexit/Twitter, Vaccination/Reddit, etc. Each of
1022 K. Kucher et al.

trump mueller co gonaid rue comey trump strzok muetier

 

Fig. 3. The user interface in StanceVis Prime: a the loaded data series table; b data series similarity views; ¢ the document
count graph; d bar charts with data series values; and e document list views

such combinations is associated with one data series based on the retrieved document count, two series for
sentiment categories, and twelve series for stance categories (cf. Table 1), which means that the user would
typically work with dozens of data series simultaneously, and it would not be possible to encode each series
with a unique hue. The sentiment categories of posiTiviry and NEGATIVITY are usually encoded by green (or
blue) and red hues by the existing sentiment visualization techniques (Kucher et al. 2018a), and our design
had to incorporate this fact to match the user expectations, too.

The current color coding approach in our implementation handles targets/domains and data categories in
an orthogonal fashion. First of all, each target is assigned with a unique hue using a qualitative scheme from
ColorBrewer (Brewer et al. 2009), and the concrete target/domain combinations are then encoded with
darker or brighter variations of that color. These colors are used in the visual representations of data series to
facilitate the comparison tasks T1—T3 between various targets/domains (see Sects. 5.2 and 5.3). Investi-
gation of alternative encodings with, e.g., pattern/texture instead of color, is part of our future work. As for
the data categories, we have assigned green and red colors to the respective sentiment categories, blue to all
stance categories, and gray to the document count series. These encodings are used in the views described in
the following subsections.

The visualization interface of StanceVis Prime is displayed in Fig. 3, with the panels (a—d) visible
initially after the user logs in and selects the data to be loaded using a dialog. The table in Fig. 3a acts as a
legend for the colors associated with each target/domain, and it also enumerates the corresponding data
series with their abbreviated titles and sparkline plots (Tufte 2006). The category labels are also used in
other parts of the interface to avoid the introduction of complicated glyphs for multiple data series. After
loading the data, the user can proceed to data series exploration.

5.2 Representation of data series similarity

As described above, the data initially loaded by the user in StanceVis Prime consists of C data series
(currently, | for document count + 2 for sentiment + 12 for stance) for each of N target/domain combi-
nations. The number of visualized data series quickly becomes overwhelming for task T3. This was our
motivation for introducing separate views with a focus on similarity rather than values. The corresponding
pipeline is displayed in Fig. 4.
StanceVis Prime: visual analysis of sentiment 1023

fort in plo T] for t in [0, T] for tin [0, T] for tin [0, T] for T time steps

DBSCAN 6
pT MDS CT = eee ae Be
a= erased analysis Su FNel0s MS
ee sas => — A

for tir in “10. T] for tin 0, T] for t in [0, T]

     

peo
ela leh) nan

N targets/domains for each ‘time step
x (1+C +C ) categories tin [0, T]
x T time steps

   

Fig. 4 The pipeline for data series similarity analysis and visualization in StanceVis Prime

The processing starts by computing dynamic time warping [DTW, see Berndt and Clifford (1994),
Esling and Agon (2012)] distances between the pairs of data series over the available time range. We use a
custom DTW implementation with a sliding window (Martins and Kerren 2018), and the size of the window
is currently set to 30% of the data series length. It is then possible to analyze the distances between the series
at each time step (temporal slice). Currently, we employ the multidimensional scaling [MDS, see Borg and
Groenen (2005)] method to compute 1D and 2D projections. We have chosen MDS as a standard and
reliable technique for this task, but it would be possible to extend our approach with other methods. Since
MDS is invariant to transformations such as rotation, our next step is to align the projections from con-
secutive time steps. We have applied Procrustes analysis (Krzanowski 2000), a technique for detecting the
optimal superimposition between a pair of data sets, to align subsequent temporal slices of both 1D and 2D
projections in a consistent way.

The resulting 2D projection can be visualized with a standard scatterplot representation one temporal
step at a time, as displayed in Fig. 5d, controlled by a slider displayed in Fig. 5c. 1D projection results could
be represented over time with a line chart, for instance; however, such attempts result in a severely cluttered
view. Therefore, we have decided to forgo the idea of using the exact 1D-projected values and instead drew
inspiration from rank-based (Shi et al. 2012) and storyline-based (Tanahashi and Ma 2012; Silvia et al.
2016) representations. For each temporal step, we have computed a clustering of the 1D projections using
DBSCAN (Ester et al. 1996). The algorithm is configured to detect clusters containing at least three items;
the items not belonging to any cluster are labeled as outliers. To compute the resulting layout for this
temporal step, we (1) order the 1D projection items by ascending value and (2) assign increasing y coor-
dinates while (3) ensuring vertical space intervals proportional to intra-cluster, inter-cluster, and intra-outlier
cases. The resulting layout is presented in Fig. 5e, g: lines represent individual data series, and dark
rectangular blocks represent the detected clusters of data series.

By glancing at this representation, the user can identify the major groups of data series and time steps
where the behavior of such groups and series changes drastically. For example, by investigating Fig. 5e, we
discover that most of the data series related to Trump/Reddit (purple) demonstrated similar behavior during
the first half of the currently explored time range. At the same time, the data series related to Brexit/Reddit
demonstrated several patterns of behavior, including one rather stable cluster. By the timestamp marked in
Fig. 5f, g, the two main clusters for both targets of interest merge, thus indicating the similar temporal
pattern for the corresponding data series. From this particular example, we can observe that sentiment and
stance data series for different targets of interest demonstrate similar behavior despite the patterns
demonstrated by the corresponding document count series (bolder lines, faded out in Fig. 5). The user can

  
   
  

Brexit Trump I...
reddit reddit

(f)

    

ta ta
An. Cau.
cr. SEER, pieceseesceseeg a
cack Sa Beer Seer ee et et et eee ee
2 SSS NS Pa Gi
Ss Bu Pe
sl ah SS SS eS
Gq Kn) Gg ry
Iu.) iw
Cace

Fig. 5 Visualization of data series similarity in StanceVis Prime: a the loaded data series table (with support for filtering and
brushing); b sparkline previews for data series; c a temporal slider; d a 2D projection view representing the data series at the
current time step; e a temporal similarity view representing the data series’ projections over time; f an indicator of the current
time step; and g a rectangular representation of a data series cluster in the 1D projection. Here, the user has hovered over the
cluster g, which caused all the data series not included in that cluster to fade out
1024 K. Kucher et al.

learn further details from the tooltip and also use the 2D view in Fig. 5d to explore the relationships between
the data series in addition to the representation in Fig. 5e. These views are coordinated with the others by
brushing and linking, so the user can explore the similarity between data series to fulfill task T3 and then
switch to investigation of specific data series values, as discussed below.

5.3 Representation of data series values

While the previous steps focused on the similarity between the loaded data series, they did not provide a
visual representation of their actual values. As mentioned in Sect. 4, each data series supported by our
approach contains the timestamped values for a combination of target, domain, and category such as Brexit/
Reddit/DISAGREEMENT. The values provide the information about the detected document counts or the number
of corresponding stance or sentiment cases. The data series values are visualized according to the pipeline in
Fig. 6 with the representations depicted in Fig. 7. A stacked graph (Havre et al. 2000; Byron and Wattenberg
2008) is used in the central part of the interface to represent the overall counts of processed documents for
each target/domain over time (see Fig. 7a). The user is initially presented with an overview of the complete
loaded data set and can then focus on a specific time interval using the range slider depicted in Fig. 7b,
which might cause the change of data granularity (e.g., from days to hours). The main graph focuses mostly
on the overall document counts rather than subjectivity categories, since it would require up to 2+12
additional plots per target/domain. However, the representation includes visual cues about the temporal
points with relatively high amounts of detected subjectivity. For instance, a “Dis” label is displayed in
Fig. 7d over the graph for Brexit/Reddit. It means that at the corresponding time step the value of the Brexit/
Reddit/DISAGREEMENT data series was relatively high compared to the maximum value in this loaded series.
By using the controls depicted in Fig. 7f, the user can adjust the minimal threshold for the relative level of
subjectivity or hide such subjectivity cues altogether (as they could lead to visual clutter in some cases). This
visual representation supports tasks T1 and T2.

sentiment and stance normalized by max values
——.
Xl eh eA CT Siile<are,
aaa yan salad

DE} e)

 

Lola (ets

document count series

(
_—, Se with additional
bar charts

subjectivity cues

  

N targets/domains
x (1+C +C ) categories

x T time steps . . .
sentiment and stance series

Fig. 6 The pipeline for data series values visualization in StanceVis Prime

Data series values

[29 Overall document counts and subjectivity cues f) Min, subjectivity for cues: 78% e
oe

©)

   
 

epee ee

Sentiment data series (number of utterances with detected sentiment)

EF negativity GO). positivity

Pe Pee Pee ool aenmemenne el teecesoenenenee
Stance data series (number of utterances with detected stance) (h) @ a
[agreement (a centainty Ea) concession and_contrariness [Toontrast

«__-oea-tofeallOHN TN fae-Socoon .abts ox onaltttlalllDntihiatatoBeosbtd — ae oe -semaabtalf lll Tb. tosssoosben

Fig. 7 Visualization of data series values in StanceVis Prime: a a stacked graph representing document counts for
target/domain combinations over time; b a range slider providing an overview for the complete loaded data set; ¢ an indicator
of the time step selected in Fig. 5c; d a subjectivity cue label indicating sentiment/stance; e a time range selection for document
queries; f subjectivity cues controls and the document query button; g sentiment data series representations; h stance data series
representations; and i a panel collapse button
StanceVis Prime: visual analysis of sentiment 1025

To support T2 further, our implementation also provides multiple small bar charts for separate sentiment
and stance data series displayed in Fig. 7g, h. This specific visual encoding was selected for several reasons
in contrast to the stacked graph representation presented above. First of all, our earlier design attempts at
reusing the stacked graph technique for each of the multiple data series views revealed the issues of
representing the rather sparse data, especially at the more detailed levels of temporal granularity such as one
second. In these scenarios, data points could be missing for certain timestamps, as no corresponding
sentiment or stance category occurrences were detected within the captured documents, thus resulting in
non-contiguous regions for visual representations such as a stacked graph. Stacked bar charts were therefore
selected as a representation that could address this issue while supporting the visual comparison of several
data series at any given timestamp. The additional benefits of this choice include (1) visual indication of a
different data type compared to the main stacked graph view, 1.e., the number of utterances with sentiment
or stance detected—as opposed to the number of captured documents; (2) support for representing the
average classification confidence level for the data series at each timestamp with opacity; and (3) reliance on
a simple, standard visual metaphor familiar to the users (Russell 2016). Investigation—and evaluation—of
further alternatives for representing the sentiment and stance data series, either separately or combined, is
part of our future work.

If the user is not interested in the details visualized with the bar charts, it is possible to collapse the
panels to save screen space (see Fig. 71). The details about individual entries for these charts can be revealed
with a tooltip, including the information such as the average classification confidence for a specific category
of stance, for instance.

Finally, the main stacked graph view also supports task T4: the user can request the documents cor-
responding to the selected time range and target/domain combinations (cf. Fig. 7e, f).

5.4 Representation of document lists

On user’s request, the document texts with sentiment and stance classification results are retrieved from the
database (see Fig. 8), and a new document list is displayed in the user interface, as displayed in Fig. 9.
Additionally, a static thumbnail of the graph selection is created to serve as a snapshot (cf. Fig. 9b).

One part of task TS is concerned with summarization of text contents of such document lists. To address
this, we have decided to provide the users with a list of key terms. Our implementation computes the counts
of uni- and bigrams (Manning and Schiitze 1999) present in the document texts and then processes them
using TF-IDF weighting (Salton and Buckley 1988). Currently, up to 25 top key terms are returned for each
document list and represented as an interactive list displayed in Fig. 9c. We used a simple list representation
(with eventual wrapped lines/rows) instead of a word cloud with spatial layout, as similar effectiveness of
these approaches for topic discovery tasks was demonstrated recently (Felix et al. 2018).

To represent the summary of category classification results for T5, our implementation includes an
interactive list of statistics for sentiment and stance categories displayed in Fig. 9d. The total number of
utterances with a specific category detected 1s computed over all document list texts and then displayed as a
numeric label. Additionally, the average stance classification confidence and the average valence for
detected POSITIVITY/NEGATIVITY are visualized with bar charts.

+ sentiment and stance
classification results

  
 

Selected from
stacked graph vis

 

Document
Interactive

document
Category Ts 6s
See 1a

   

—_

N’ targets/domains graph
x T’ time steps thumbnail

Fig. 8 The pipeline for document lists and text views representation in StanceVis Prime
1026

#0: @ Brexit / reddit, @ Trump Investigation / wsst(@) ex

———

brexit hara trump eu hard

soft going softbrexit vote boris

think like deal uk

  

mment party way
labour mueller ime

 

474 478 66 136 633 461 419 406 361 509 208 375 50 594
ea ee ee eRe eee eee oe

#3: @ Brexit / reddit, @ Trump Investigation / reddit +2 x

 

 

169 144 24 43 217 153 135 129 118 127 83 144 22 161
ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee oe |

#1: @ Trump Investigation / reddit ex
impeachment

©)

94 47 6 21 89 49 71 44 77 40 25 81 3 40
ae eee eR ee ee ee 8 oe

K. Kucher et al.

#2: @ Brexit / reddit e+2%

 

 

Focusing on predictions here!

1495 out of 1495 docs ki politics 19 out of 466 docs i 23 out of 145 docs hi 67 out of 323 docs kh

(ET | believe some people didn't even think that far - it was never G
explained. | *know* some people voted leave for literally no other reason than
the government wanted them to vote remain. I've spoken to those

>McCarthyism is the disappearing dissenters thing. (°° F-79 And funny that CG
you mention MLK given what the FBI tried to do to get him to shut up.
(GEESE That's rich. You mean McCarthy was responsible for disappearing

Just your reminder that Brexit is all part of Russia's plan as laid out in the G
Foundation of Geopolitics. > The U.K. should be cut off
from the rest of Europe, to prevent the coalescence of power structures.

(I > “Trump Should Not Be Impeached Even If He Colluded
With Russia** Here's where Dershowitz shows his bias.
He claims to be a strict constructionist yet goes on to put words into the

  

, Burnley and are on the whole decent people, but are about
dissenters? Wait, you're talking about death as in secret . a constitution that aren't there... the fact is that impeachment is (and was always "
assassinations? (CSE) McCarthy may have ruined Ther deere \ ayhoud tele is not inherenty er ty sled \ G intended as) a strictly political issue ... the constitution, while giving examples, oncnens. co EE | toleve lone People
people careers (and his own) but he didn’t have anyone murdered. " y nan “ a anand much over Wasty od . only hom at left the House of Representatives as the sole arbiter of what conduct warrant: are lt fad d for a total severance - but aot y vote avi total
That's not how we do it here, remember? Everything all peachy keen for the want somebody to do “something”. (GEEEESES Whet | wouldn't accuse them of impeachment (and the Senate as the sole arbiter of whether the President Severance of trade until a brand new deal is secured? (ZELXZZ9 Did they vote

is ‘party over country’ politics. In fact, I'd say it's the Tories doing that (poorly). for a hard border on Ireland, knowing full well the potential for insanity that

American people, you said. Nope. Secret police breaking down your door in the should actually be removed from office). By trying to pretend there is some type
Tt Ts Labor 00s! ‘ ?
middle of the night; that's the Russian MO for getting rid of someone like MLK. coo (SE EEE Labour is dotinitely choosing ‘politics over of legal require unleashes? [ETT Tr9 ELT Voting for a total severance includes voting for
country’, but what else can they do exactly? (5573 [TST ISZ9 Besides, the Dershowitz exj Document domain: reddit those things and many entirely predictable ramifications besides that, and |

Or if he was lucky, some Soviet would have shown him how “happy”
soviet comrades were by stuffing him in some gulag if he was smmmes lucky.
More than likely he would have been beaten

end benefactor is still the country; the only thing Labour can do right now is lay
the groundwork for winning future elections. (5°—""} Going anti-Brexit will
infuriate a large section of their voter base, meaning their chances at actually
being able to do anything in the future will be reduced. (7-3 ([STT}!
get why they'd want to remain uncommitted to any position, but only because |
sympathize with being stuck between a rock and a hard place. That said,
you're right in that they're internally kind of a mess - even if they came by the
mess honestly.

believe those things - the entirely predictable ramifications, not speculation or
fear mongering - should be addressed with at least the broad outline of a
workable plan before brexit proceeds. [Z*ITE=J To do otherwise seems at
best poor stewardship on the part of the politicians, at worst deliberately
looking for chaos.

Its curious h) Created at: Mon Jul 09 2018 21:28:11 GMT+0200 (Central

Trump, but I'm) ropean Summer Time)

to death after watching Soviets rape his wife and kill his children. >Yes, the US
takes a lot of flak for South America. May have something to do with
the fact that it was the US that invaded some of the countries, the US that
toppled the government, the US that supplied rebels with weaponry and the US
who assassinated the people. You cant just say "oh everyone is guilty" because

Dershowitz. | jt

I'm waiting for | Targets: Brent

trump-impeach
— even ifithap Sentiment:

CEE Oh Jesus, what a mess. (ESET) (SST T=-) Well hopefully this CG
means the whole Brexit plan is just scrapped.

no, we werent. (CGE) The US is the only guilty party, they are >This would f¢ + (C5LZIIJ Oh Jesus, what a mess. . »
100% at fault and should take sole responsibility. We? | see. Yes, the US did (CEZZI) Nothing in politics has ever made me so disappointed or angry. G the cart before * (ia) Well hopefully this means the whole Brexit plan is just scrapped : Well yes it is, but that's largely due to the lack
get up to some dirty business in S. America in order to combat Soviets There's a lot of negativity from r/Europe and other places, and | can see why. They hear the | of clarity. (SSEY ELSES 18 months ago we were heading for an FTA, 8

months ago it was CETA+, now it looks like the Jersey option, give in another
few months and it'll be EEA. Davis atleast IMO has a vision for Brexit that
wasn't predicated on consolidating his position in power.

(CSE | May was a ideologue and committed Leaver it would have been
much more simple and her redlines would have been informed by her beliefs

enflaming communist revolution and murdering large portions of indigenous

[ce Con: 0.575 | But wait! There's more! (oT Y"rY Let's talk about

all the Eastern Bioc - all of those nations invaded and terrorized by the USSR?
Let's talk about Prague. (7Y"y9 Let's talk about the

MILLIONS af nennie terrnrizad hy a monstrous anvernment who ahsnrher

Some of the Brexit fans are utterly insane, but |
promise you that there are plenty of us that still want to be a part of Europe :'-(

when you begi Stance:

before itgoest , (GEL Wet hopefully this means the whole B:
their report anc

exit plan is just scrapped.

coo
https:/Awww.reddit.com/r/politics/comments/8qt6e9/robert_mueller_files_request_for.

tA Sina Imnnanhmant auan Hf Mamanrate didnt

Fig. 9 Document list representations in StanceVis Prime: a a header including the list description, close and export buttons,
and a drag’n’drop indicator icon; b a static thumbnail copied from the representation displayed in Fig. 7a; ¢ a list of salient uni-
and bigrams discovered in the document texts; d statistics for sentiment and stance classification results in the document texts;
e additional controls including an area for user notes, a text search field, and a sort button; f a document view with injected
labels with utterance classification results; and g a tooltip with details for a selected document. Here, the user has changed the
position of one of the lists with drag’n’drop and used various interactions in c—e and g

The user interactions for document lists include filtering (by key terms or detected categories), notes/
annotations, text search (cf. Fig. 9e), sorting (e.g., by timestamp or by detected stance occurrences),
reordering the lists for comparison, and removing them.

To support T6, the document lists provide access to the actual texts as seen in Fig. 9f, including links to
the source social media posts. Sentiment and stance classification results are injected directly into the
document view as labels with abbreviated category titles and classification confidence results. By hovering
over a document, the user is presented with a tooltip displayed in Fig. 9g which includes additional details
about the document timestamp, data domain, associated target(s) of interest, and detailed classification
results. It is also possible to click a document element to make the tooltip persistent.

Finally, the user can use the export button located in the document list header (see Fig. 9a). In this case, a
static version of the document list is exported as an HTML file, with user notes, filtering, and sorting
preserved (cf. Fig. 10d, g). Exported lists can be used for further offline investigation, thus supporting T7.

6 Case study

In this section, we demonstrate the usage of StanceVis Prime with two case studies. In the first study, the
information about public sentiment and stance on two different targets of interest is compared for Twitter
data. In the second study, we focus on a single target of interest in two different data sources, Twitter and
Reddit.

6.1 Case study a: Brexit and European politics on Twitter

In this case study, we have explored the Twitter data for summer 2018 available in StanceVis Prime. We
have focused on two targets of interest tracked in our system: Brexit and European Politics. The initial time
range of interest is the complete summer 2018; the resulting stacked graph, initially loaded at the granularity
of one day, is displayed in Fig. 10a.

We can see that the volume of tweets for Brexit (in green) dominates this data set, and the maximum
number of posts is created at a time step highlighted in Fig. 10b. This time step corresponds to July 9, 2018,
and there are 742,139 tweets retrieved in our system for this data point. According to the subjectivity cues,
multiple categories of sentiment and stance reach large values on this day, such as NEGATIVITY, UNCERTAINTY,
and POSITIVITY.

As we focus on a shorter time range corresponding to this day and filter out the data series related to the
other target, the representation changes to hourly values, as displayed in Fig. 10c. We can now see that a
large number of tweets were produced starting around 16:00 (GMT+2). Exploration reveals that there are
StanceVis Prime: visual analysis of sentiment 1027

secretary bre. son resigns foe trump

Apparently, this one is about the resignation of Boris Johnson, and the prevailing subj. categories are source of knowl uncertainty, negativity, and positivity And this one is apparently about Trump calling EU a

Text fiter query: N/A Text filter query: N/A
Sort mode: Overall amount of subjectivity (desc) Sort mode: Overall amount of subjectivity (desc)

eaeocme _Semdeccb But te meh erate was Ken Unga, whol ready begun o werd end Jtneon seemed decent EI Io ? ERIE) Tere you go Aneta, fke President Tuy end he European
more dea

him for years warning me atthe tive that Johnson was somethi oda a monster, but we didn't see his full mal er & louder what Trump is all about. (ZET Trump is ste Poot humanity !

 

# all favour and oink a ok CY "yout anigroran

CIID EI eAvoscouonies om Kat he Eopean oe. XIII rtain
= trig sertay. ECT EI CLS CT CY CY Ts cates bts ver as rent aks, ink Thaesa Me ccoremcaly canary ae aoe. ETH EETIN Bu het doer meen hy ar bed: ESOTETD ower ean anyig” Hea

s NOW
might have to bite the bullet oad seson, has 0 control of her cabinet, going to be extremely difficult to negotiate brexit but if she does. [ESTT™") But what else’

 

Fig. 10 The Twitter data in case study A: a the data series view in StanceVis Prime for Brexit (green) and European Politics
(red) for the complete summer 2018; b the data selection corresponding to July 9, 2018; ¢ the updated data series view
representing the hourly data for Brexit on July 9, 2018; d the exported document list with the tweets relevant to Brexit retrieved
for the time period 16:00-16:20 on July 9, 2018; e the data selection corresponding to July 15, 2018; f the updated data series
view representing the hourly data on July 15, 2018; and g the exported document list with the tweets relevant to European
Politics retrieved for the time period 17:30-18:30 on July 15, 2018

79,711 tweets in total for this hour, containing 14,706 utterances with UNCERTAINTY, 12,992 with NEGATIVITY,
and 11,279 with positivity.

After focusing on a shorter period (16:00—16:20) and retrieving the documents, we can find out that the
main key terms for the corresponding document list were “secretary,” “johnson,” “resigns,” and so on.
Apparently, this spike in the discussion of Brexit on Twitter was related to the resignation of the UK Foreign
Secretary Boris Johnson. The related utterances include, for example, “Chaos ensues” (labeled with NEG-
ATIviTy by our classifiers), “Jf true it’s effectively the final nail in the coffin for May” (Positivity, HYPO-
THETICALS, and UNCERTAINTY), and “Could be good for Ireland if it leads to Theresa May having a stronger
hand to push through a soft Brexit” (POSITIVITY, HYPOTHETICALS, NEED & REQUIREMENT, and UNCERTAINTY).
After interacting with the document list, we can export it for further offline exploration, with the result
displayed in Fig. 10d.

Returning to the complete loaded data set, we can now focus on the data region where European Politics
gained prominence (see the red band of the stacked graph in Fig. 10e), which corresponds to July 15, 2018,
with 122,298 tweets in our retrieved data. Focusing further and switching to the granularity of one hour, we
can see in Fig. 1O0f that sudden growth of interest for this target started around 18:00 (GMT+2). There are
13,945 tweets corresponding to this hour, with 7,990 utterances classified with NEGATIVITY, 2,177 with
POSITIVITY, and 2,070 with the stance of SOURCE OF KNOWLEDGE. After focusing on the period of 17:30—18:30
and investigating the document list, we can find out that this case is related to the quote of POTUS Donald
Trump naming European Union “a foe” in an interview. As we can see in the exported document list in
Fig. 10g, a lot of expressions of sentiment were produced in the tweets, followed by several stance
categories such aS SOURCE OF KNOWLEDGE, NEED & REQUIREMENT, and CONCESSION & CONTRARINESS. The
examples include utterances such as “Jf you look at the thing they quoted, Trump clearly said that the
European Union was an economic foe” (CERTAINTY, HYPOTHETICALS, and SOURCE OF KNOWLEDGE), “Man’s a
lunatic” (NEGATIVITY), and “But the concern should be there just the same” (NEED & REQUIREMENT).

By using StanceVis Prime in this case study, we were able to understand the temporal trends in public
sentiment and stance on several targets of interest, retrieve and get an overview of the underlying text data
for specific time ranges, and use the exported versions of document lists for close reading offline (cf. user
tasks T1-T2 and T4—-T7).

6.2 Case study B: European politics in Twitter data versus Reddit comments

In the second case study, we have compared the data on the same target of interest (European Politics) from
two data sources, Twitter and Reddit. We have selected a time range of several days around September 9,
1028 K. Kucher et al.

#0: §§ European ras wes) +2 x #1: @ European Politics / reddit | b | $2x #2: @ European Politics / reddit | C ) +2 x

swedish sweden

   

swedish election
sweden

sweden election sd mp

456 331 18 20 292 202 222 109 238 351 71 1440 36 362 33 #27 «#3 11 70 52 33 37 50 21 12 61 8 2 43 47 12 18 117 86 60 47 63 56 10 93 12 41
=a nm me meee ee eee oe he le smmnmieseweeee ee =amimmtmitieetoeaiseaese es
4260 out of 5039 docs i 5 out of 50 docs i 10 out of 80 docs i
RT @czarymarybum777: @SaveMySweden Hello my dear @ CE | you have to teach adults than it's not okay to beat women, rape boys Transcript because | was bored: "The most responsible thing to do now, isnotto
Friend. Today is a great day in Sweden. and girls, or kill gays, you're Just unleashing hell on your own citizens. At this speculate, is not that different parties dig themselves into positions, it is to let the
| am convinced that it will be the day of your great win. ! Point, Swedes deserve everything coming their way. ) powerful, Swedish democratic machinery to finish up. [SST 5779 We have two
wish you this with all my heart. [7TS7r) Keep me updated on the course of the (SEE | heard there are reports of election fraud. There are videos weeks left until the opening of the riksdag, | will work calmly as prime minister

election. To WIN! https://t.co/nZaioTn85C online of people who work at the voting stations hiding or throwing away voting with respect (cheers) with respect, with respect for the voters and the Swedish
ballots of parties they dislike. We all know which parties will be electoral, with it we shall act when we “really* know the final results.

Co @Kstupples | don't know everything about the sabbath, but (J — ; a es .
$ negatively affected by this. This supposedly carries a jail sentence of two years. But one thing is clear, no side has a clear majority and it is natural with

there are people of all faiths voting in Sweden. Polling stations are open all day.

Fig. 11 The document lists for European Politics in case study B: a relevant tweets retrieved for the evening of September 9,
2018; b relevant Reddit comments retrieved for the evening of September 9, 2018; and c relevant Reddit comments retrieved
for the morning of September 10, 2018

2018, when a general election took place in Sweden. After exploring the temporal data and downloading the
document lists, we can confirm the expectation that the number of documents from Twitter for the same time
range would be much larger than the number of Reddit comments on this subject, as seen in Fig. 11a, b with
approximately 5000 tweets and 50 Reddit comments (however, we should note that the incoming Reddit
data stream was initially filtered to a set of specific subforums, as mentioned in Sect. 4). Filtering the
document lists on key terms related to the Swedish election reduces these numbers even further. The
examples of relevant utterances found in tweets include “Today is a great day in Sweden” (positivity), “I
guess that will do Sweden” (PREDICTION and UNCERTAINTY), and “J understand none of it but hey I might live
there some day so I should probably watch their election process” (CONCESSION & CONTRARINESS, CONTRAST,
NEED & REQUIREMENT, and UNCERTAINTY). The relevant Reddit comments include utterances such as “J heard
there are reports of election fraud” (NEGATIVITY and SOURCE OF KNOWLEDGE), “Most votes for the party were
clearly protest votes” (POSITIVITY and CERTAINTY), and “Sweden TV needs to ask the BBC for tips on how to
report elections...”” (NEED & REQUIREMENT).

A more lively discussion of the Swedish elections on Reddit does not start until the morning of the next
day, September 10, as seen in Fig. I 1c. It is interesting to compare the documents between the data sources,
though, as Reddit comments tend to contain much longer statements and arguments rather than short tweets,
which might be interesting for further detailed exploration with close reading. For instance, some relevant
utterances found in this case are “However it would be completely illogical if the right parties with fewer
mandates demands to govern anyway” (DISAGREEMENT and HYPOTHETICALS), “Sweden is extremely progres-
sive, most parties would be seen as progressive parties in the US except the nationalist Sweden Democrats
and the Christian Democrats” (CONCESSION & CONTRARINESS and CONTRAST), and “As the statistics showed,
most SD voters come from the Socialdemocrats which have been the most progressive party in Sweden”
(SOURCE OF KNOWLEDGE).

In summary, this case study demonstrated support for comparisons between data from several sources
with a focus on retrieval, overview, and close reading of multiple document lists (cf. user tasks T4—T7).

7 Discussion

In this section, we report the preliminary expert user feedback received for StanceVis Prime and reflect upon
various aspects of our implementation, including its scalability and generalizability.

7.1 Expert user review

While our approach has not been evaluated with a larger user study yet, we have relied on an expert review
to collect valuable user feedback (Tory and Moller 2005). It was provided by one of our project collabo-
rators, a postdoctoral researcher in computational linguistics, who had previously contributed to the
development of the stance classifier used by our system’s backend. This expert user had prior knowledge
about information visualization and visual analytics, but she had not been involved in the design and
development of StanceVis Prime. During the session which lasted several hours, we (1) explained the
StanceVis Prime: visual analysis of sentiment 1029

underlying design choices, (2) demonstrated the visual interface functionality, (3) allowed the user to engage
in free data exploration with a think-aloud protocol, and (4) conducted a semi-structured interview using the
ICE-T questionnaire by Wall et al. (2019) focusing on the value of visualization.

The expert decided to focus on the target of Vaccination rather than political targets, as she had
previously worked on this topic in her own research. Based on the sparkline charts in the data loading
dialog, the expert settled on the data from mid-August to early September 2018 from both Twitter and
Reddit. When exploring the stacked graph view, the cues about NEGATIVITY and NEED & REQUIREMENT in the
Twitter data for a specific day (August 26, 2018) caught the eye of the expert. She focused on this date,
studied the detailed category charts, and loaded the corresponding documents (approximately 33,000
tweets). The expert used the category bar charts to focus on the documents with NEED & REQUIREMENT and/or
NEGATIVITY and engaged in close reading of the resulting documents. After studying multiple texts, she
concluded that (1) the classification results seemed reasonable; (2) there were a lot of urges and requests
both to vaccinate and not to vaccinate in the tweets; and (3) NEGATIVITY did not co-occur with NEED &
REQUIREMENT in the data.

The expert also investigated other time ranges with a focus on TACT and SOURCE OF KNOWLEDGE. Her
insights included the discoveries that (1) many occurrences of TAcT in this data are in fact explained by
sarcasm; and (2) many references to SOURCE OF KNOWLEDGE include vague statements and opinions (“people
are saying that...” ) rather than facts and authorities (however, several references to organizations, such as
CDC, were also found).

In general, the expert concluded that StanceVis Prime seemed useful for the tasks of investigating public
sentiment and stance. As her expertise is in computational linguistics, she was particularly interested in
exploring the classification results in documents corresponding to the peaks in the data series. The expert
user also commended the possibility of exporting the document lists annotated with user notes for further
analyses and close reading.

The expert also had some suggestions and notes on the current shortcomings, mostly related to the
document list views. First of all, she noted a number of duplicate documents (retweets) in the Twitter data
and suggested collapsing them in order to focus only on unique texts. Second, she noted that it would be
useful to support “AND” -based category filters (in addition to the currently supported “OR”’) in document
list views in order to focus on particular combinations of categories, such as NEGATIVITY and NEED &
REQUIREMENT mentioned above. Taking such selected combinations of categories into account when sorting
the document lists was also potentially useful in the expert’s opinion. Finally, the delays associated with the
document loading stage for larger data sets (more than 10,000 documents) were also perceived negatively.
These comments and suggestions will be taken into account as part of the future work to improve StanceVis
Prime.

7.2 Scalability and limitations

While our approach is designed to continuously retrieve and apply computational analyses to text documents
from streaming data sources such as Twitter, it is currently unable to support real-time streaming data
processing and visual analysis for several reasons. First of all, the current design of the backend (see Sect. 4)
includes the data collection service, the database, and the classification service as separate components.
After the incoming documents are received and preliminary filtered (typically at a rate up to several dozens
of documents per second, depending on the targets of interest, time of day, ongoing events, etc.), they are
stored in the database and put on the classification queue. The classifiers provided by our project collab-
orators are currently deployed separately from StanceVis Prime since they are used for multiple purposes as
a RESTful web service. Unfortunately, this implies a significant overhead for data serialization and transfer,
and one of our next steps for improving the performance of StanceVis Prime is going to be the direct
integration of the classification codebase in our system. As for the scalability of the server-side computa-
tions for visual analysis tasks, StanceVis Prime uses efficient implementations of DTW, MDS, and
DBSCAN algorithms for data series similarity analysis, as discussed in Sect. 5.2, and standard text pre-
processing algorithms for document lists, as discussed in Sect. 5.4. Thus, as long as the indices are set up
properly within the underlying database, the performance of server-side computations for the visualization
frontend is not the main performance concern. Further performance measurements for individual server-side
elements of our system can be considered part of our future work, though. Extension of the client-side
elements of Stance Vis Prime to support real-time streaming data visualization is also an interesting prospect,
1030 K. Kucher et al.

however, as we discuss below in Sect. 7.3, such a real-time monitoring task might not be a priority for the
users interested in long-term trends and underlying textual data.

With regard to the scalability of the visual interface, we should also note that the coordinated multiple
views strategy has a drawback related to the overall screen area usage. The user interface of StanceVis
Prime supports window resizing with regard to width, but it is designed with a vertical workflow in mind,
from the source data selection and listing to the data series charts and the document lists, which results in
vertical scrolling on smaller monitors. One possible alternative solution would be to introduce separate
windows or tabs for separate views, similar to document list tabs in uVSAT (Kucher et al. 2016). However,
it could arguably disrupt the user’s mental map and would also make comparison between multiple doc-
ument lists more difficult. For the time being, we intend our implementation to be used on desktop monitors
rather than laptop screens. Displaying some of the detailed views on demand only is also an option (cf.
Fig. 71).

Additionally, the visualization of data series similarity discussed in Sect. 5.2 can be subject to visual
clutter depending on the number of displayed data series and the output of MDS and DBSCAN algorithms.
This representation could be improved in the future using the methods introduced for storyline visualizations
(Tanahashi and Ma 2012; Silvia et al. 2016). While the 2D projection view displayed in Fig. 5d is currently
limited to MDS, we could allow the user to change the underlying dimensionality reduction algorithm to
reduce the clutter, for instance. Our data series representations could also adapt some of the aspects of
MultiStream (Cuenca et al. 2018) for hierarchical multiscale series. We are also aware of the risks of the
current color coding scheme used for targets/sources and categories in these representations, however, the
expert user feedback did not include any complaints in this regard.

Finally, the web browser rendering performance for our visual interface depends on the loaded data set
size, especially for document lists. Thus, the workflow currently recommended to the users is to focus on
moderate time ranges when requesting the documents, i.e., the scale of minutes or hours rather than days or
months.

7.3 Overall utility and generalizability

Based on the range of user tasks supported by Stance Vis Prime (see Sect. 3), we expect its components and
views to have different value to different users: for instance, the expert feedback discussed in Sect. 7.1
confirms our expectation that experts in linguistics and computational linguistics would ultimately be
interested in accessing and studying text data when using our tool. For example, the said expert was mainly
interested in several specific sentiment and stance categories as well as the underlying documents, rather
than investigation of numerous data series over an extended period of time. The representations focusing on
temporal data and data series similarity could be more interesting to the users interested in overall trends in
public sentiment and stance, such as brand managers or political scientists, and it would be a part of our
future work to collaborate with such users. Further interactive control over the parameters of computational
analyses, such as DTW, should be provided to such users, too. While our case studies in Sect. 6 did not make
use of the DIT W-related views, the example in Sect. 5.2 demonstrated how these views could help the users
analyze the similarities between sentiment and stance patterns across several targets of interest or data
sources. These are exactly the insights associated with the user task T3, and we would like to continue the
investigation of such analyses as part of our future work.

We foresee several ways to generalize our approach. First of all, Stance Vis Prime was initially designed
to support multiple data sources: it is already possible to access and compare the data from the two currently
supported social media platforms. Our approach can also be generalized to other temporal text data sources
and, with some modifications, to static corpora. Second, we are currently using a specific set of sentiment
and stance categories which could be extended or replaced as long as text analyses are carried out at the
utterance/sentence level: for instance, our stance classification pipeline could be extended with another
classifier which achieves better classification results for a limited set of categories such as AGREEMENT and
DISAGREEMENT (Mohammad et al. 2017) by using deep learning (Chen and Ku 2016; Lai et al. 2015; Liu
et al. 2017) or ensemble learning approaches (Sagi and Rokach 2018). Finally, our research so far has
focused only on texts in English, and it would be interesting to apply Stance Vis Prime to text data in other
languages once the respective sentiment and stance classifiers are available.
StanceVis Prime: visual analysis of sentiment 1031

8 Conclusions and future work

In this paper, we have discussed our work on StanceVis Prime, a visual analytics platform for social media
texts supporting sentiment and stance analysis. Our approach is based on the definition of stance categories
and a classifier developed as part of an interdisciplinary project on stance analysis. Based on the require-
ments of our project collaborators, StanceVis Prime allows the users to investigate temporal trends, get an
overview about document sets, study individual texts, and export processed documents for further offline
exploration. We demonstrate our approach with two case studies and expert user feedback from one of our
collaborators. Further analysis of the data already collected with StanceVis Prime (190 million documents
so far) in collaboration with experts in sociolinguistics is one of the next steps in our work. Another step is
evaluation with a full-fledged user study.

This contribution opens up additional opportunities for future work on visual analysis of sentiment and
stance as well as other aspects of temporal text data. Our approach could be enriched with additional
analyses and representations, e.g., by using geospatial information (Martins et al. 2017), named entity
recognition (El-Assady et al. 2016), topic modeling (Dou and Liu 2016; Wang et al. 2016b), and anomaly
detection (Cao et al. 2016). While StanceVis Prime supports the export of some of the analytical findings as
annotated document lists, our approach could be extended with further means to externalize and present
analytical results, thus following the suggestions by Chen et al. (2018) on bridging the gap between visual
analytics and storytelling. Visual analysis of the public discourse structure (Cao et al. 2015; El-Assady et al.
2018; Lu et al. 2018) enriched by sentiment and stance data is also an interesting prospect. Combining such
an approach with the analyses discussed above would make it possible to shift the focus of the workflow
from the initial selection of targets of interests—as currently supported by StanceVis Prime—towards the
monitoring and investigation of patterns and themes emerging in the incoming data in a dynamic way.
Finally, the methods of predictive analytics (Lu et al. 2017) could be introduced to forecast public sentiment
and stance on specific targets of interest in social media.

Acknowledgements Open access funding provided by Linnaeus University. The authors would like to thank Maria Skeppstedt
for her contributions to the implementation of computational text analyses, as well as for providing her feedback for StanceVis
Prime. This work was partially supported by the framework grant “The Digitized Society—Past, Present, and Future” from the
Swedish Research Council (Vetenskapsradet) [Grant Number 2012-5659].

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the
original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The
images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

References

Aigner W, Miksch S, Schumann H, Tominski C (2011) Visualization of time-oriented data. Springer, Berlin. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-0-85729-079-3

Alencar AB, Borner K, Paulovich FV, de Oliveira MCF (2012) Time-aware visualization of document collections. In:
Proceedings of the 27th annual ACM symposium on applied computing, ACM, SAC’ 12, pp 997-1004. https://doi.org/10.
1145/2245276.2245469

Alspaugh S, Zokaei N, Liu A, Jin C, Hearst MA (2019) Futzing and moseying: interviews with professional data analysts on
exploration practices. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graphics 25(1):22—31. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2018.2865040

Bernard J, Wilhelm N, Scherer M, May T, Schreck T (2012) TimeSeriesPaths: projection-based explorative analysis of
multivariate time series data. J WSCG 20(2):97-106

Berndt DJ, Clifford J (1994) Using dynamic time warping to find patterns in time series. In: Proceedings of the AAAI
workshop on knowledge discovery in databases, AAAI Press, KDD’94, pp 359-370

Biber D, Finegan E (1989) Styles of stance in English: lexical and grammatical marking of evidentiality and affect. Interdiscip
J Study Discourse 9(1):93-124. https://doi.org/10.1515/text.1.1989.9.1.93

Borg I, Groenen PJF (2005) Modern multidimensional scaling: theory and applications. Springer, Berlin. https://doi.org/10.
1007/0-387-28981-X

Bostock M (2011) D3—data-driven documents. https://d3js.org/. Accessed 28 July 2020

Brewer C, Harrower M, The Pennsylvania State University (2009) ColorBrewer 2.0—color advice for cartography. http://
colorbrewer2.org/. Accessed 28 July 2020
1032 K. Kucher et al.

Byron L, Wattenberg M (2008) Stacked graphs: geometry & aesthetics. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graphics 14(6):1245—1252.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2008.166

Cao N, Lin YR, Sun X, Lazer D, Liu S, Qu H (2012) Whisper: tracing the spatiotemporal process of information diffusion in
real time. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graphics 18(12):2649-2658. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2012.291

Cao N, Lu L, Lin YR, Wang F, Wen Z (2015) SocialHelix: visual analysis of sentiment divergence in social media. J Vis
18(2):221-235. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12650-014-0246-x

Cao N, Shi C, Lin S, Lu J, Lin YR, Lin CY (2016) TargetVue: visual analysis of anomalous user behaviors in online
communication systems. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graphics 22(1):280—289. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2015.2467 196

Chatzimparmpas A, Martins RM, Jusufi I, Kucher K, Rossi F, Kerren A (2020) The state of the art in enhancing trust in
machine learning models with the use of visualizations. Comput Graphics Forum 39(3):713—756. https://doi.org/10.1111/
cef.14034

Chen WF, Ku LW (2016) UTCNN: a deep learning model of stance classification on social media text. In: Proceedings of the
26th international conference on computational linguistics—technical papers, ACL, COLING 2016, pp 1635-1645

Chen S, Lin L, Yuan X (2017) Social media visual analytics. Comput Graphics Forum 36(3):563—587. https://doi.org/10.1111/
cgef.13211

Chen S, Li J, Andrienko G, Andrienko N, Wang Y, Nguyen PH, Turkay C (2018) Supporting story synthesis: bridging the gap
between visual analytics and storytelling. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graphics. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2018.2889054

Crnovrsanin T, Muelder C, Correa C, Ma KL (2009) Proximity-based visualization of movement trace data. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE symposium on visual analytics science and technology, VAST’09, pp 11-18. https://doi.org/10.1109/VAST.
2009.5332593

Cuenca E, Sallaberry A, Wang FY, Poncelet P (2018) MultiStream: a multiresolution streamgraph approach to explore
hierarchical time series. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graphics 24(12):3160—3173. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2018.
2796591

Cui W, Liu S, Tan L, Shi C, Song Y, Gao Z, Qu H, Tong X (2011) TextFlow: towards better understanding of evolving topics
in text. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graphics 17(12):2412-—2421. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2011.239

Diakopoulos N, Zhang AX, Elgesem D, Salway A (2014) Identifying and analyzing moral evaluation frames in climate change
blog discourse. In: Proceedings of the eighth international AAAI conference on weblogs and social media, AAAI,
ICWSM’ 14, pp 583-586

Dork M, Gruen D, Williamson C, Carpendale S (2010) A visual backchannel for large-scale events. IEEE Trans Vis Comput
Graphics 16(6):1129-1138. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2010.129

Dou W, Liu S (2016) Topic- and time-oriented visual text analysis. IEEE Comput Graphics Appl 36(4):8—13. https://doi.org/
10.1109/MCG.2016.73

El-Assady M, Gold V, Acevedo C, Collins C, Keim DA (2016) ConToVi: multi-party conversation exploration using topic-
space views. Comput Graphics Forum 35(3):431—440. https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.12919

El-Assady M, Sevastjanova R, Keim D, Collins C (2018) ThreadReconstructor: modeling reply-chains to untangle
conversational text through visual analytics. Comput Graphics Forum 37(3):351—-365. https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.13425

Englebretson R (ed) (2007) Stancetaking in discourse: subjectivity, evaluation, interaction, pragmatics & beyond new series,
vol 164. John Benjamins, Amsterdam. https://doi.org/10.1075/pbns.164

Esling P, Agon C (2012) Time-series data mining. ACM Comput Surv 45(1):12:1—12:34. https://doi.org/10.1145/2379776.
2379788

Ester M, Kriegel HP, Sander J, Xu X (1996) A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with
noise. In: Proceedings of the second international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, AAAI Press,
KDD’96, pp 226-231

Felix C, Franconeri S, Bertini E (2018) Taking word clouds apart: an empirical investigation of the design space for keyword
summaries. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graphics 24(1):657—666. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2017.2746018

Glynn D, Sjolin M (eds) (2014) Subjectivity and epistemicity: corpus, discourse, and literary approaches to stance. Lund
studies in English. Lund University Press, Lund

Havre S, Hetzler B, Nowell L (2000) ThemeRiver: visualizing theme changes over time. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
symposium on information visualization, IEEE, InfoVis’00, pp 115-123. https://doi.org/10.1109/INFVIS.2000.885098

Hosmer DW Jr, Lemeshow S, Sturdivant RX (2013) Applied logistic regression. Wiley, Hoboken. https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781118548387

Hutto C, Gilbert E (2014) VADER: a parsimonious rule-based model for sentiment analysis of social media text. In:
Proceedings of the eighth international AAAI conference on weblogs and social media, AAAI, ICWSM’ 14

Jackle D, Fischer F, Schreck T, Keim DA (2016) Temporal MDS plots for analysis of multivariate data. IEEE Trans Vis
Comput Graphics 22(1):141-150. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2015.2467553

Janicke S, Franzini G, Cheema MF, Scheuermann G (2015) On close and distant reading in digital humanities: a survey and
future challenges. In: Proceedings of the EG/VGTC conference on visualization—STARs, The Eurographics Association,
EuroVis’ 15. https://doi.org/10.23 12/eurovisstar.20151113

Krzanowski WJ (2000) Principles of multivariate analysis. Oxford statistical science series. Oxford University Press, Oxford

Kucher K, Kerren A (2015) Text visualization techniques: taxonomy, visual survey, and community insights. In: Proceedings
of the 8th IEEE Pacific visualization symposium, IEEE, PacificVis’ 15, pp 117-121. https://doi.org/10.1109/PACIFICVIS.
2015.7156366

Kucher K, Schamp-Bjerede T, Kerren A, Paradis C, Sahlgren M (2016) Visual analysis of online social media to open up the
investigation of stance phenomena. Inf Vis 15(2):93-116. https://doi.org/10.1177/1473871615575079

Kucher K, Paradis C, Sahlgren M, Kerren A (2017) Active learning and visual analytics for stance classification with ALVA.
ACM Trans Interact Intell Syst 7(3):141-1431. https://doi.org/10.1145/3132169

Kucher K, Paradis C, Kerren A (2018a) The state of the art in sentiment visualization. Comput Graphics Forum 37(1):71—96.
https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.13217
StanceVis Prime: visual analysis of sentiment 1033

Kucher K, Paradis C, Kerren A (2018b) Visual analysis of sentiment and stance in social media texts. In: Poster abstracts of the
EG/VGTC conference on visualization, The Eurographics Association, EuroVis’18, pp 49-51. https://doi.org/10.2312/
eurp.20181127

Lai S, Xu L, Liu K, Zhao J (2015) Recurrent convolutional neural networks for text classification. In: Bonet B, Koenig S (eds)
Proceedings of the twenty-ninth AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, AAAI, AAAT’ 15

Liu S, Wu Y, Wei E, Liu M, Liu Y (2013) StoryFlow: tracking the evolution of stories. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graphics
19(12):2436-2445. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2013.196

Liu J, Chang WC, Wu Y, Yang Y (2017) Deep learning for extreme multi-label text classification. In: Proceedings of the 40th
international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval, ACM, SIGIR’17,
pp 115-124. https://doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3080834

Liu S, Wang X, Collins C, Dou W, Ouyang F, El-Assady M, Jiang L, Keim DA (2019) Bridging text visualization and mining:
a task-driven survey. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graphics 25(7):2482—2504. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2018.2834341

Lu Y, Garcia R, Hansen B, Gleicher M, Maciejewski R (2017) The state-of-the-art in predictive visual analytics. Comput
Graphics Forum 36(3):539-562. https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.13210

Lu Y, Wang H, Landis S, Maciejewski R (2018) A visual analytics framework for identifying topic drivers in media events.
IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graphics 24(9):2501—2515. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2017.2752166

Manning CD, Schiitze H (1999) Foundations of statistical natural language processing. MIT Press, Cambridge

Martins RM, Kerren A (2018) Efficient dynamic time warping for big data streams. In: Proceedings of the 3rd workshop on
real-time & stream analytics in big data & stream data management at IEEE Big Data’ 18, pp 2924-2929. https://doi.org/
10.1109/BigData.2018.8621878

Martins RM, Simaki V, Kucher K, Paradis C, Kerren A (2017) StanceXplore: visualization for the interactive exploration of
stance in social media. In: Proceedings of the 2nd workshop on visualization for the digital humanities, VIS4DH’ 17

Mohammad SM (2016) Sentiment analysis: detecting valence, emotions, and other affectual states from text. In: Meiselman
HL (ed) Emotion measurement. Woodhead Publishing, Sawston, pp 201—237. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-100508-
8.00009-6

Mohammad SM, Kiritchenko S, Sobhani P, Zhu X, Cherry C (2016) SemEval-2016 task 6: detecting stance in tweets. In:
Proceedings of the international workshop on semantic evaluation, SemEval’ 16

Mohammad SM, Sobhani P, Kiritchenko S (2017) Stance and sentiment in tweets. ACM Trans Internet Technol
17(3):26:1-26:23. https://doi.org/10.1145/3003433

Pang B, Lee L (2008) Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Found Trends Inf Retr 2(1—2):1—135. https://doi.org/10.1561/
1500000011

Pedregosa F, Varoquaux G, Gramfort A, Michel V, Thirion B, Grisel O, Blondel M, Prettenhofer P, Weiss R, Dubourg V,
Vanderplas J, Passos A, Cournapeau D, Brucher M, Perrot M, Duchesnay E (2011) Scikit-learn: machine learning in
Python. J Mach Learn Res 12:2825—2830

Pirolli P, Card S (2005) The sensemaking process and leverage points for analyst technology as identified through cognitive
task analysis. In: Proceedings of the international conference on intelligence analysis, vol 5

Rauber PE, Falcio AX, Telea AC (2016) Visualizing time-dependent data using dynamic t-SNE. In: Short papers of the EG/
VGTC conference on visualization, The Eurographics Association, EuroVis’16. https://doi.org/10.2312/eurovisshort.
20161164

Roberts JC (2007) State of the art: coordinated & multiple views in exploratory visualization. In: Proceedings of the fifth
international conference on coordinated and multiple views in exploratory visualization, IEEE, CMV’07, pp 61-71.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CMV.2007.20

Russell DM (2016) Simple is good: Observations of visualization use amongst the Big Data digerati. In: Proceedings of the
international working conference on advanced visual interfaces, ACM, AVI’ 16, pp 7-12. https://doi.org/10.1145/2909132.
2933287

Sacha D, Stoffel A, Stoffel F, Kwon BC, Ellis G, Keim DA (2014) Knowledge generation model for visual analytics. IEEE
Trans Vis Comput Graphics 20(12):1604—1613. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2014.234648 1

Sagi O, Rokach L (2018) Ensemble learning: a survey. WIREs Data Min Knowl Discov 8(4):e1249. https://doi.org/10.1002/
widm.1249

Salton G, Buckley C (1988) Term-weighting approaches in automatic text retrieval. Inf Process Manag 24(5):513-—523. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0306-4573(88)9002 1-0

Shi C, Cui W, Liu S, Xu P, Chen W, Qu H (2012) RankExplorer: visualization of ranking changes in large time series data.
IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graphics 18(12):2669—2678. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2012.253

Shrestha A, Miller B, Zhu Y, Zhao Y (2013) Storygraph: extracting patterns from spatio-temporal data. In: Proceedings of the
ACM SIGKDD workshop on interactive data exploration and analytics, ACM, IDEA’ 13, pp 95-103. https://doi.org/10.
1145/2501511.2501525

Shutterstock Images, LLC (2011) Rickshaw: a JavaScript toolkit for creating interactive time-series graphs. https://github.com/
shutterstock/rickshaw. Accessed 28 July 2020

Silvia S, Etemadpour R, Abbas J, Huskey S, Weaver C (2016) Visualizing variation in classical text with force directed
storylines. In: Proceedings of the Ist workshop on visualization for the digital humanities, VIS4DH’ 16

Simaki V, Paradis C, Skeppstedt M, Sahlgren M, Kucher K, Kerren A (2017) Annotating speaker stance in discourse: the
Brexit blog corpus. Corpus Linguist Linguist Theory. https://doi.org/10.1515/cllt-2016-0060

Skeppstedt M, Paradis C, Kerren A (2016a) PAL, a tool for pre-annotation and active learning. J Lang Technol Comput
Linguist 31(1):91-110

Skeppstedt M, Sahlgren M, Paradis C, Kerren A (2016b) Active learning for detection of stance components. In: Proceedings
of the workshop on computational modeling of people’s opinions, personality, and emotions in social media at
COLING’ 16, ACL, PEOPLES’ 16, pp 50-59
1034 K. Kucher et al.

Skeppstedt M, Simaki V, Paradis C, Kerren A (2017) Detection of stance and sentiment modifiers in political blogs. In:
Proceedings of the international conference on speech and computer. Springer, SPECOM’ 17, pp 302-311. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-66429-3_29

Tanahashi Y, Ma KL (2012) Design considerations for optimizing storyline visualizations. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graphics
18(12):2679-2688. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2012.212

Tory M, Moller T (2005) Evaluating visualizations: do expert reviews work? IEEE Comput Graphics App! 25(5):8—-11. https://
doi.org/10.1109/MCG.2005.102

Tufte ER (2006) Beautiful evidence. Graphics Press, Cheshire

Tukey JW (1977) Exploratory data analysis. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Boston

Wall E, Agnihotri M, Matzen L, Divis K, Haass M, Endert A, Stasko J (2019) A heuristic approach to value-driven evaluation
of visualizations. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graphics 25(1):491-500. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2018.2865 146

Wang X, Liu S, Chen Y, Peng TQ, Su J, Yang J, Guo B (2016a) How ideas flow across multiple social groups. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on visual analytics science and technology, IEEE, VAST’16, pp 51-60. https://doi.org/10.1109/
VAST.2016.7883511

Wang X, Liu S, Liu J, Chen J, Zhu J, Guo B (2016b) TopicPanorama: a full picture of relevant topics. IEEE Trans Vis Comput
Graphics 22(12):2508—2521. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2016.25 15592

Wu Y, Wei F, Liu S, Au N, Cui W, Zhou H, Qu H (2010) OpinionSeer: interactive visualization of hotel customer feedback.
IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graphics 16(6):1109-1118. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2010.183

Wu Y, Liu S, Yan K, Liu M, Wu F (2014) OpinionFlow: visual analysis of opinion diffusion on social media. IEEE Trans Vis
Comput Graphics 20(12):1763-—1772. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2014.2346920

Zhang L, Wang S, Liu B (2018) Deep learning for sentiment analysis: a survey. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Data Min Knowl Discov
8(4):e1253. https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1253

Zhao J, Gou L, Wang F, Zhou M (2014) PEARL: an interactive visual analytic tool for understanding personal emotion style
derived from social media. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on visual analytics science and technology, IEEE,
VAST’ 14, pp 203-212. https://doi.org/10.1109/VAST.2014.7042496

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.
