European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035

 

    

LSEVIER

eas

European Journal of Operational Research

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect ROPEAN JOURNAL OF

£U
OPERATIONAL ESEARCH

 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ejor

 

Decision Support

Constitutive rules for guiding the use of the viable system model:
Reflections on practice

Check for
updates

 

David Lowe**, Angela Espinosa“, Mike Yearworth**

4 Systems Centre, Faculty of Engineering, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 ITR, United Kingdom

> Dstl, Portsdown West, Fareham, PO17 6AD, United Kingdom

“Centre for Systems Studies, Hull University Business School, Hull, HU6 7RX, United Kingdom

4 Centro de Innovaci6n y Sostenibilidad, Facultad de Administraci6n de Empresas, Universidad Externado de Colombia, Bogota, Colombia
€Centre for Simulation, Analytics & Modelling, University of Exeter Business School, Exeter, EX4 4ST, United Kingdom

ARTICLE INFO

Article history:

Received 31 July 2019
Accepted 16 May 2020
Available online 27 May 2020

Keywords:

Viable system model
Problem structuring methods
Constitutive rules
Epistemology

Hierarchical Process Model

1. Introduction

ABSTRACT

The Viable System Model (VSM) provides a well-established framework to aid the design and diagnosis
of organisations to survive and thrive in complex operating environments. However, the cognitive acces-
sibility of the VSM presents a significant barrier to its application with non-expert stakeholders. In the
face of such difficulties, VSM practitioners will often take steps to adapt the classic presentation of VSM
to suit the needs of their particular operational context. We propose a set of constitutive rules, including
an explicit epistemology, that can both account for the variety of VSM practice reported in the literature
and also be used to guide practitioners in their application of the VSM and thus make rigorous use of
VSM theory. The epistemology is expressed as a performative model, expressed as a Hierarchical Process
Model (HPM), of the practitioner’s use of the VSM in an engagement. We use this model to describe,
reflect upon, and learn about VSM practice by the cross-case analysis of three recent VSM interventions.
The combination of variability in problem structuring and specificity to the VSM afforded by the con-
stitutive rules and the performative epistemology in combination has provided insight into the social
ontology of VSM practice and the boundaries of what should be considered acceptable practice from a
competence perspective. Our approach is intended to encourage wider and better application of VSM
theory in preparing organisations to maintain performance in uncertain futures.
© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)

redesign) of organisations to not only survive but to thrive in such
changing environments.

The Viable System Model (VSM) was developed by Beer (1979,
1981, 1984, 1985) to explain how organisations can continuously
adapt to changing environments by harnessing the principles of
complexity and variety management. Whilst the VSM was first
proposed long ago, it is attracting increasing numbers of re-
searchers and practitioners, as the operating conditions faced by
many organisations in the 21st century are more clearly charac-
terised by increasing volatility, uncertainty, complexity and ambi-
guity (Bennett and Lemoine, 2014). These conditions threaten not
only the performance of organisations but their very existence.
The VSM draws upon Ashby’s laws on requisite variety and self-
organisation (Ashby, 1958) and McCulloch’s model of neural net-
works (McCulloch, 1965) to support the diagnosis and design (and

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: m.yearworth@exeter.ac.uk (M. Yearworth).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2020.05.030

The VSM specifies the necessary and sufficient conditions for
any organisation to remain viable in any environment. The VSM
asserts that this viability is dependant on keeping a balanced re-
lation with the environment in which it operates, and from which
it gets its resources; and that such balance results from the ex-
istence and interactions between five key typologies of organisa-
tional functions (Systems 1 to 5) with their external and internal
stakeholders at different levels of organisation. The VSM offers ba-
Sic criteria to manage complexity and ‘Laws, Axioms and Principles
of Organisation’ to guide the organisational analysis. It is a recur-
sive model which can be applied to organisational networks of any
scale and complexity.

The VSM has been widely used in domains as diverse as strat-
egy management, operations and supply management, information
management, service science, governance, sustainability, knowl-
edge management, performance management, learning, education

0377-2217/© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035 1015

and innovation, and community development. The use of VSM in
these domains has been both in a functionalist sense, where prac-
titioners act in expert mode, and in an interpretivist sense where
practitioners act in facilitator mode (Franco and Montibeller, 2010).
In the functionalist mode, the practitioners compare the ‘reality’ of
the problem situation to VSM theory and recommend actions ac-
cordingly. There are specific methods for using VSM in this mode
such as Viable Systems Diagnosis (Flood and Jackson, 1991) and
Systemic Management Control (Schwaninger, 1990). Whereas in
the interpretivist mode, practitioners work with organisations to
understand their (dis)function, identify actions to improve their
effectiveness and viability and to follow through building on the
consensus that has been established (Espejo, Bowling, and Hover-
stadt, 1999; Espinosa, Harnden, and Walker, 2008). A number of
examples of the use of the VSM in this way have been reported
(Brocklesby, 2012; Espejo and Reyes, 2011; Espinosa and Duque,
2018; Espinosa and Walker, 2013, 2017; Harwood, 2012; Tavella
and Papadopoulos, 2015). Together these suggest ways in which
the VSM supplies the necessary systemic approach to be a Problem
Structuring Method (PSM) by using “systems ideas (including bound-
ary, complexity, variety, learning, heterarchy, communication and con-
trol), which (i) are appropriate to context, (ii) theoretically adequate,
and (iii) supported by appropriate systems modelling” (Yearworth
and White, 2014). More recently, Harwood (2019) has provided a
short critique of the evaluation made by (Smith and Shaw, 2019)
and concluded that the VSM can indeed be viewed as a PSM.

The VSM has been the subject of criticism and in particular the
cognitive accessibility of the VSM has been recognised to be an is-
sue for many who have tried to apply it in everyday OR practice
(Jackson, 1988; Ulrich, 1981). It is therefore typical for those intro-
ducing the VSM to a new setting for use as a PSM to make adap-
tations to the VSM in how it is presented and used. This raises an
important research question: how much adaptation is acceptable
before the model being used to support interventions in terms of
organisational and process design can no longer considered to be
the VSM? It also raises other interesting research questions in the
performative idiom (Ormerod, 2014; Pickering, 1993; White, Year-
worth, and Burger, 2015) such as: how is the VSM actually being
used in practice as a PSM and with what variability? Also, what is
it that a VSM practitioner is doing when they are using the VSM
as a PSM? In order to address these questions, we first elaborate
a set of constitutive rules derived from previous work (Checkland
and Scholes, 1990, pp. 284-290; Jackson, 2001; 2003, pp. 305-311;
2019, pp. 601-604; Yearworth and White, 2014) and then go on to
develop an explicit epistemology to provide a basis for the compar-
ative analysis of VSM practice. Both the constitutive rules and the
epistemology are expressed as a performative model akin to a pur-
poseful activity system model that can act as a handrail for prac-
titioners when applying the VSM as a PSM - especially for novice
practitioners applying the VSM the first few times, or established
PSM practitioners with experience in other methods. In addition,
the performative model can act as a reflective device to aid practi-
tioners in their learning from practical applications of VSM theory.
Our aim is to ensure that the connection to underpinning theory is
not lost and to expand the application of this powerful approach -
including to some of the most difficult problems faced by organi-
sations today - by making it easier for others to understand.

This paper now proceeds to describe the VSM and review
canonical VSM related methodology. It then outlines our develop-
ment of a set of constitutive rules and the associated explicit epis-
temology (Section 3) to guide the application of the VSM as a PSM
and so contribute to overcoming the difficulties experienced in
practice. We then present three case studies of recent VSM inter-
ventions where the original theory and tools have been adapted to
suit the needs of their particular operational contexts and are eval-
uated using our performative model (Section 4). The paper closes

 

Fig. 1. The VSM adapted from Espinosa and Walker (2017, p. 64).

by discussing implications both for practice and for future research
(Section 5) and drawing conclusions (Section 6).

2. Review of vsm methodology

Beer (1975) defined Organisational Cybernetics as the “science of
effective organization” with the aim of challenging traditional man-
agement models, which he found to be inadequate for address-
ing the many complex and messy situations faced by managers.
Beer (1979, 1981, 1984, 1985) developed the VSM as a concep-
tual model for the design of organisations as self-organised net-
works, operating without a central control (i.e. heterarchies not
hierarchies). He described the necessary and sufficient conditions
for an organisational system to be viable, i.e. capable of maintain-
ing an independent existence in a dynamic operating environment.
The VSM contains a set of typologies for organizational roles -
which Beer named Systems 1 to 5 - whose balanced interaction
is a pre-requisite for organisational viability. Beer recommended
that organisations be (re)designed as neural networks where each
operational unit (System 1 in his terms) creates value though the
generation of products and/or services by operating with ‘responsi-
ble autonomy’. These networks are repeated at multiple (recursive)
layers of organization so that each node in these networks is in it-
self a viable system. VSM is thus a recursive model of organization.

The VSM offers a meta-language to map organizational com-
plexity, and to analyse organizational viability. In doing so, the
VSM distinguishes between three main elements; Operations (O)
— where the products or services are produced; meta-systemic
management (M) - responsible for providing the operations with
all the required technical and administrative support for effective
production; and environment (E) - for which the operations pro-
duce their products or services and within which the organisa-
tion as a whole lives. The model in its standard representation
is shown in Fig. 1. In order to maintain viability, there is a need
to manage complexity between operations and meta-system, be-
tween meta-system and environment and between operations and
1016 D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035

environment. Each of these three elements changes over time and
this necessitates continuous self-reference and self-adaptation. If
the organization manages to keep its identity, reputation and pat-
terns of interactions within its niche, despite the system having to
cope with an unpredictable external environment, then it is said to
be maintaining internal homoeostasis (Beer, 1985).

The focus of VSM analysis is the homoeostatic balance be-
tween operations and environment, meta-system and environment,
operations and meta-system, and within the meta-system itself,
following Ashby’s laws of requisite variety (Ashby, 1958), Matu-
rana’s principle of autopoiesis (Maturana, 1975), and Beer’s regula-
tory aphorisms, principles of organisation, theorem and law (Beer,
1979, pp. 565-567). Ashby defined ‘complexity’ as all the possi-
ble states that a system can exhibit at a particular moment; and
‘variety’ as the number of possible states, as recognised by an
observer. Ashby’s Law explains that “only variety absorbs variety”
(Ashby, 1958). Beer (1979, pp. 32-48) explains the paramount con-
sequences of this law for managing complexity, and for generat-
ing knowledge in organisations. The organisational purpose deter-
mines its variety: as each Operational System (System 1) enacts a
purpose or identity, and there are always multiple ways for formu-
lating organisational identity, the perceived purpose depends on
the point of view of particular observers. The VSM offers criteria
to balance varieties of operations, environment and meta-systemic
management. It suggests that communication channels should be
designed following variety laws; that it is desirable to balance hor-
izontal variety (i.e. dealing with environment) and vertical variety
(i.e. dealing with management and operations); and that in a re-
cursive organisational structure, any viable system contain, and is
contained in, a viable system. It also provides criteria to balance
the variety of Systems 3, 4, and 5.

A complete VSM intervention would aim to support participants
in finding more balanced and effective ways of self-organising, by
focusing organisational tasks around the operational tasks; and by
providing the required resources and skills for supporting their
implementation. Beer provided the background theory and the
generic methodological guidance on how to use the VSM in his
core texts (Beer, 1979, 1981, 1985). There have been many sub-
sequent contributions to apply the VSM via specific methods.
VSM methodologies originally suggested for supporting organisa-
tional diagnosis included: ‘Viable Systems Diagnosis’ (Flood and
Jackson, 1991), ‘Viable Boundary Critique’ (Yolles, 2001); ‘Holis-
tic Management Approach’ (Christopher, 2007), ‘Systemic Manage-
ment Control’ (Schwaninger, 1990, 2006), and ‘Viable Knowledge
Management’ (Achterbergh and Vriens, 2002), Most of them fo-
cus on understanding functions versus structure, with emphasis on
knowledge, performance and information management. Neverthe-
less, Beer’s closest collaborators have worked on producing more
constructionist interpretations of the original theory and method-
ology, focusing on learning while developing organisational tasks,
rather than on effectively designed functions and roles; and there-
fore, emphasizing conversations rather than information exchange
amongst stakeholders. This includes the ‘Viplan methodology’
(Espejo and Reyes, 2011), and the ‘Self-Transformation Methodol-
ogy’ (Espinosa and Walker, 2017) - originally inspired by Viplan -
both of which have been widely used in several contexts and coun-
tries to support organisational transformations. In both methodolo-
gies, the emphasis is in managing complexity to enable learning in
related change processes. The variety of methodologies and related
methods demonstrates a degree of interpretation in how to trans-
late the VSM into a practical method for engagement with broad
organisational problems, but makes it difficult for practitioners to
understand what is most important, and what can be learnt from
seemingly disparate practice.

Jackson originally identified VSM as a functionalist approach in
his System of System Methodologies (Jackson, 1993, pp. 86-111;

Jackson and Keys, 1984) but later conceded that “the functional-
ist paradigm certainly does not exhaust the possibilities opened
up by the VSM” (Jackson, 2001). Jackson provides a useful, and
forceful, critique of the use of systems methods with function-
alist roots in plural contexts. The System of System Methodolo-
gies (SoSM) underpins the basis for this critique, structured as it
is on the original work of Burrell and Morgan (1979) and firmly
grounded in the assertion of paradigm incommensurability. Jack-
son classified the VSM as only applicable to unitary contexts in
the SoSM, which he equates to the functionalist paradigm of the
Burrell and Morgan Framework. Whereas, SSM and PSMs gener-
ally Jackson classifies as applicable to plural contexts in the SoSM
with an underpinning interpretivist paradigm, and hence the orig-
inal assertion of incommensurability of the VSM and PSMs. Even
today, the use of the VSM as a PSM gives rise to some contro-
versy, harking back to this old argument and underlining the in-
fluence of such frameworks. This is despite exhortations that we
should all have ‘moved on’ by now (White and Taket, 1996). For
example, the analysis of PSMs by Smith and Shaw (2019) would
appear to exclude the VSM from qualification as a PSM. However,
this conclusion is clearly challenged by Harwood (2019) through
a different interpretation of the Smith and Shaw questions that
focusses on subjectivism and facilitation in VSM practice, in ef-
fect arguing that VSM practitioners have been successful in its ap-
plication to plural contexts and thus establishing its compatibil-
ity with an interpretivist stance. Contemporaneously, in his most
recent work, Jackson (2019, p. 332) recognises that the method-
ologies developed by Espejo and Reyes (2011) and Espinosa and
Walker (2017) seek to engage individual perceptions in a learn-
ing process using VSM as a guide. He also considers that Beer’s
‘Team Syntegrity’ (1994) was his last methodological development
to deal with the complexity of VSM’s 3/4/5 Homeostat in that it
“steers clear of functionalism” (Jackson, 2019, p. 464) and that it
comes to terms with the pluralism and coercion that can arise in
social systems’ (ibid, pp. 467). The VSM has been critiqued for re-
stricting focus to how the necessary functions are carried out un-
derplaying cultural, political and coercive aspects (Jackson, 2003).
This is largely restricted to the application of the VSM when used
in a functionalist sense, where a VSM practitioner brings special-
ist expertise to bear in comparing ‘as is’ or ‘to be’ organisational
models against the VSM ‘blueprint’. However, this is contrary to
the most recent trend in VSM research where there are grow-
ing number of innovative developments of the original VSM in-
spired by Soft OR, which move the use of VSM away from func-
tionalism towards a more interpretivist perspective (Espejo and
Reyes, 2011; Espinosa and Walker, 2017). Evidence of this can
be found across a broad swathe of published work (Ackermann,
2012; Edson and Klein, 2016; Espinosa and Walker, 2013; Espinosa,
Reficco, Martinez, and Guzman, 2015; Hart and Paucar-Caceres,
2017; Harwood, 2018, 2019; Jackson, 2006; Lowe, Martingale, and
Yearworth, 2016; Mingers, 2000; Preece, Shaw, and Hayashi, 2015;
Smith and Shaw, 2019; Tavella and Papadopoulos, 2017). There
have also been many new VSM applications that exhibit some de-
gree of being a multimethodology approach (Mingers and Brock-
lesby, 1997; Pollack, 2009) such as combining the VSM with Com-
plex Adaptive Systems (Espinosa and Porter, 2011; Espinosa et al.,
2008), combining with Systems Dynamics (Schwaninger and Pérez
Rios, 2008), and with Lean Systems (Schwaninger and Pérez Rios,
2008).

The potential for learning across the wide range and ever-
increasing applications of the VSM is very significant. For exam-
ple, from organisational transformation (Espejo and Reyes, 2011;
Espinosa and Walker, 2013); strategic management (Espinosa et
al., 2015), performance management (Bititci, Carrie, and McDe-
vitt, 1997); information management (Preece, Shaw, and Hayashi,
2013); government and governance (Espinosa and Duque, 2018),
D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035 1017

sustainability (Espinosa and Walker, 2017), learning, education and
innovation (Leydesdorff and Nerghes, 2017), servitization and out-
come based contracts (Batista, Davis-Poynter, Ng, and Maull, 2017)
and community operational research (Espinosa and Walker, 2013;
Tavella and Papadopoulos, 2015). The diversity of applications and
the diffusion of learning shows that methodological learning is tak-
ing place, not just simple application of method. This is a key fea-
ture of a PSM, recognising that the unique context of messy prob-
lem contexts and the need for methodology to improve with ap-
plication and adapt to circumstance. From this diversity of appli-
cations and the fact that learning is diffusing through the commu-
nity of VSM practitioners suggests that there must be a mechanism
that both aids this diffusion and also the flexibility to adapt to dif-
ferent messy problem contexts and allow this ‘learning across’ to
take place. This sets up the fundamentals for our appeal to con-
stitutive rules as the mechanism. We return to these points in the
cross case learning and the discussion.

We now proceed in the next section to build on this broad
foundation of VSM methodological development and wide applica-
tion and address critique by presenting our development of a set
of constitutive rules together with an explicit epistemology to sup-
port practitioners in their use of the VSM as a PSM.

3. Methodology
3.1. The use of constitutive rules, a review

The origins of constitutive rules for PSMs can be traced to the
work of Checkland (1981, pp. 252-254) who defined them for Soft
Systems Methodology (SSM), building on earlier work to develop
constitutive rules for SSM as a pedagogic device to support teach-
ing the methodology at the Open University (Naughton, 1977).
Checkland and Scholes enlarged on the original concept of defin-
ing constitutive rules for SSM practice and introduced the idea that
claims of ‘valid’ SSM use could be evaluated against these consti-
tutive rules, at least in the case of Mode 1 use (Checkland and Sc-
holes, 1990, pp. 280-284). The distinction that Checkland and Sc-
holes make between Mode 1 and Mode 2 use of SSM has a direct
bearing on the performative view of SSM, and hence PSMs gener-
ally and on the interpretation of using the VSM as a PSM, and on
the notion of there being such a construct as a constitutive defini-
tion:

“...the authors came to see a real difference, not merely a semantic
conceit, between ‘using SSM to do a study’ and ‘doing work using
SSM’. The essence of this difference emerged as the difference be-
tween, on the one hand, mentally starting from the SSM, using it
to structure what is to be done, and, on the other, mentally start-
ing what is to be done and mapping it on to SSM, or making sense
of it through SSM.”

This distinction led them not to a dichotomy but the recogni-
tion that SSM practice occurred on a spectrum between the poles
of Mode 1 and Mode 2 use and therefore the notion that the per-
formance of an ‘SSM’ engagement with a client could in principle
sit anywhere between the two. From this they proceeded logically
to a presentation and discussion of the constitutive definition for
SSM (ibid, pp. 284-290). It was clear that in contrast to rigidly de-
fined method, constitutive rules would capture a description of the
methodology that could account for practice anywhere on the con-
tinuum between Mode 1 and Mode 2 use i.e. the constitutive rules
would be generative of the range of practice observed.

In addressing this question of validity, a more profound exis-
tential view of SSM emerged, neatly summarised by: "It is the Con-
stitutive Rules which are of greater interest since they answer the
stark question: What is SSM? If there are no such rules then in what
sense can SSM be said to exist?" (ibid, p.285). Checkland and Scholes

augmented the original constitutive rules for SSM with an explicit
epistemology (ibid, pp.288-289). In their formulation, we can think
of the constitutive rules as comprising an action part, which de-
scribe the SSM process, and the epistemology part specific to SSM
and which describes the objects or entities involved and in which
the SSM process makes sense. Whilst Checkland and Scholes did
put forward the case where the constitutive rules for SSM could be
combined with other epistemologies, presumably leading to ‘new’
methodologies of the soft systems/problem structuring type, no ev-
idence has been found in the literature for any such examples.

We conclude that developments along these lines pertaining to
the use of an epistemology grounded in the VSM may well have
been avoided due to burgeoning issues of paradigm incommen-
surability as discussed in the review,! causing the debate in the
problem structuring community to turn to practical concerns with
multimethodology (Howick and Ackermann, 2011; Mingers, 2001;
Mingers and Brocklesby, 1997; Mingers and Gill, 1997; Pollack,
2009) aligned to a position of methodological pluralism (Jackson,
2019, pp. 519-522). It is perhaps unfortunate that the usefulness
of constitutive rules was overlooked. We only return to the debate
here because we are specifically resurfacing Checkland and Scholes’
idea of combining constitutive rules with a defined epistemology,
but with the benefit of further work on constitutive definitions we
discuss below and sound empirical grounding of our argument in
current VSM practice.

The utility of defining constitutive rules for a methodology was
given a further boost by Jackson (2001; 2003, pp. 305-311), who
developed constitutive rules for systems approaches grounded in
each of the four sociological paradigms’ defined by the quad-
rants of the Burrell and Morgan (1979) framework, which to-
gether formed the constitutive rules for the use of generic sys-
tem methodologies as part of Critical Systems Practice (CSP).
These, together with the original constitutive rules for SSM, led to
Yearworth and White (2014) adopting a similar approach for devel-
oping a Generic Constitutive Definition (GCD) for PSMs. The orig-
inal intention behind the development of the GCD was primarily
to identify further sources of data about non-codified use of prob-
lem structuring methods. The authors envisaged a fuzzy interpreta-
tion of the elements of the definition when evaluating cases (ibid,
p.942 Table 6). However, the performative construction of the GCD
does mean that it is also useful in the design of problem structur-
ing interventions and thus where a similar fuzziness applies. The
situation is therefore not much different from that originally out-
lined by Checkland above; the GCD offers greater or lesser support
to the practitioner in constructing a problem structuring interven-
tion depending on how closely the elements of the definition are
followed.

Although the idea of constitutive rules has not been applied yet
to the use of the VSM we have established in our review that there
is sufficient methodological justification and evidence of the use of
the VSM as a PSM to suggest that we can concentrate on develop-
ing a performative (process) description of VSM-as-a-PSM in prac-
tice i.e. how the VSM is used as method or what we define here
as the VSM process. Our review also theorised that the process of
learning across a diverse range of applications of the VSM must
be mediated by a mechanism such as constitutive rules. Finally,
there is support from Jackson (2019, p. 604) who states that “...the
VSM, originally designed as a functionalist device, can be seamlessly
fitted into the interpretive or emancipatory generic methodologies”.
Our approach is essentially implementing this suggestion, a multi-
methodology that reconciles the purely phenomenological position

1 See, for example, Lane (1994) who wrestles with this problem in the case of
Soft OR and System Dynamics.

2 Although in the latest work this had been reduced to functionalist, interpretive,
and emancipatory.
1018 D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035

on systems of Checkland (1981, pp. 278-281 in particular) and the
interpretivist underpinnings of PSMs, with the functionalist posi-
tion (that Jackson considered was adopted by Beer) in proposing
that some generic patterns of interaction between organisation, en-
vironment and management (O, E, M) through different types of
roles (the 5 systems) represented by the VSM are common to all
viable systems. Nevertheless, their identification and mapping rely
on the observers’ Weltanschauung.

3.2. Approach

Checkland and Scholes developed their rules for SSM based on
both extensive empirical work and derived from an original ped-
agogical purpose. On the other hand, Yearworth and White devel-
oped their constitutive rules from an extensive qualitative analy-
sis of published PSM research. In yet another approach, Jackson
developed constitutive rules from the perspective of Critical Sys-
tems Practice (CSP). All three sources suggest that there is no sin-
gle unifying approach to describing constitutive rules and that they
have all ‘emerged’ from observations and experience of practice. In
all cases they capture a description of actions that are collectively
recognised as belonging to a particular type of intervention (Searle,
2006).

Our approach is a synthesis of Checkland and Scholes, who sep-
arated the constitutive rules of SSM from its epistemology, and
Jackson, who posits that the functionalist “device” of the VSM can
be “seamlessly fitted into” an interpretive generic methodology. We
have, therefore, chosen to represent the empirical evidence of the
use of the VSM as a PSM as a combination of i) a set of constitu-
tive rules that capture an interpretive methodology describing the
problem structuring aspects of using the VSM in engagements, to-
gether with ii) a set of constitutive rules that describe how the
VSM has been used to diagnose problems and thus capturing a
more functionalist epistemology. Furthermore, based on experience
of using systems representations expressed as Hierarchical Process
Models (HPM) (Lowe et al., 2016) we have chosen to use a process
perspective to represent the latter. Analysing the structure of con-
stitutive rules from a process perspective suggests a performative,
behavioural interpretation of the act of intervention in a problem-
atic situation (Ormerod, 2014; Pickering, 1993, 1995). The question
of the validity of the intervention, in the sense of whether it was,
or was not, a VSM intervention, can be answered performatively
by examining’ what it was the practitioner was doing when they
claimed to be conducting an intervention using the VSM.

3.3. Constitutive rules for an interpretive vsm methodology

Our putative set of constitutive rules to guide VSM practice
have been synthesised from the extant constitutive definitions for
SSM (Checkland and Scholes, 1990), CSP (Jackson, 2003, 2019) and
the GCD (Yearworth and White, 2014) and their interpretation in
the light of the VSM as a PSM approach discussed in the review.
Our synthesis, or theming, is inclusive rather than being selective
and is presented below together with further supporting references
and then summarised in Table 1 to show cross referencing to their
sources. In formulating these rules, we are in effect filling-in the
gaps in our understanding between literature and practice i.e. cod-
ifying the constitutive rules that generate variability in practice.

I Aiming to bring about improvements: The aim of using the
VSM as a PSM to guide interventions is to bring about im-

3 Literally by observation (e.g. ethnomethodology (Garfinkel, 1996)), or by a writ-
ten account of the intervention in the style suggested by (Ormerod, 2014). The im-
portant thing is that there is empirical evidence arising from the conduct of the
intervention (the process of the methodology) that would enable an observer to
answer the question.

provement in a problematical situation. It is important to

recognise that whilst definitive answers or solutions may be

sought, this is impractical in almost every case and so im-

provement is sought instead (Rittel and Webber, 1973).

Using models as learning devices: VSM-guided interventions

use models as a means to structure debate and so enable

stakeholders to learn from each other about the way or-
ganisations can improve the way they deal with certain
types of complex situations. This model can be viewed as

a negotiative device, transitional object or boundary object

(Ackermann and Eden, 2011b; Eden, 1995; Franco, 2013;

Harwood, 2019).

Making no assumption that an observer has an objective view

or that different observers share the same worldview: It is im-

portant to recognise that when addressing problematical sit-

uations that different stakeholders will bring different per-
spectives and that they will also not necessarily share the
same worldview. The first point has implications for how
content is elicited and managed and the second has implica-
tions for how the process is implemented (Espejo and Reyes,

2011, pp. 20-23)

IV Tailoring application to practical situations: The VSM provides
a robust framework for intervening in complex situations,
but since every such situation will be different, no imple-
mentation will ever be the same. There is therefore a need
to tailor the application of VSM through a process of con-
scious thought that seeks to balance rigour and relevance
(Robey and Markus, 1998).

V Using methods and techniques creatively to examine the prob-

lematical situation: Matching the approach to meet the needs

of the complex situation will typically involve blending a

number of specific methods. Such methodological plural-

ism should be based on an appreciation of their respective

strengths and weaknesses (Howick and Ackermann, 2011;

Jackson, 2001; 2003, pp. 305-311; 2019, pp. 601-604).

Extracting methodological lessons through reflection: The use

of the VSM as a PSM should yield research findings in addi-

tion to improving the problematic situation. These findings
will typically be methodological in nature because they re-
late to the procedural nature of the intervention rather than
the substantive nature of the problem, which will be differ-

ent in every case (Ormerod and Pidd, 2006).

Studying organisational interactions using VSM distinctions and

principles, as an explicit epistemology to identify necessary in-

terventions: If the VSM is to be used as a PSM for studying
organisational interactions and for identifying interventions,
then the PSM should adhere to the distinctions and princi-
ples laid down by the VSM. Ensuring that the PSM as imple-
mented adheres to the underpinning theory is critical not
only for the validity of results but also for long-term credi-
bility of the VSM - and PSMs in general - as a rigorous un-
dertaking (Ackermann, Franco, Rouwette, and White, 2014;
Jackson, 2019, p. 340).

I

—

II

—

V

—

VI

—

3.4. Constitutive rules for a vsm epistemology

Mingers (2003) has defined epistemology as “the forms of
knowledge and knowledge creation that the method(ology) uses and
forms of representation in modelling”. The epistemology developed
by Checkland and Scholes (1990, pp. 288-289) to accompany the
constitutive rules developed for SSM was described simply as
the “language through which a methodology’s process makes sense”.
Whilst Checkland Scholes point out that the constitutive rules for
SSM could be used with other epistemologies they were not spe-
cific about the use of the VSM. As discussed above in the context
of the System of Systems Methodologies there has been sufficient
D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035 1019

Table 1
Constitutive rules for an interpretive VSM methodology.

Linked SSM
Constitutive Rule

VSM Constitutive Rule

Linked CSP
Constitutive Rule

Linked GCD
Constitutive Rule

i. Aiming to bring about improvements 1 1 1

ii. Using models as learning devices 2, 3b, 3c,3d 7

iii. Making no assumption that an observer has an objective 3a 8 5, 6, 8
view or that different observers share the same worldview

iv. Tailoring application to practical situations 4 9

v. Using methods and techniques creatively to examine the 2,5, 6 3
problematical situation

vi. Extracting methodological lessons through reflection 5 9 4

vii. Studying organisational function using VSM distinctions 2 1, 3,4 2
and principles as an explicit epistemology to identify
necessary interventions

Table 2
Performative process description of a VSM epistemology.
Process Sub-Process
Defining the system in focus 1. Organisational Identity-Establishing a purpose for the organisation (products or services), its stakeholders
and its boundaries
2. Levels of Recursive Organisation-Identifying the sub-organisations directly responsible for implementing core
products or services and the larger system of which the system in focus is part.

Identifying & assessing the 3. Operational Units (S1)-Delivering the products or services, with requisite variety to deal with their
sub-systems within the environment(s).
system-in-focus 4. Harmonisation (S2)-Preventing recurrent conflicts amongst primary units, by providing shared values,

languages, standards and protocols for information, communications and processes.

5. Self-Regulation and Synergies (S3)-Supporting self-regulation for each of the operational units and realising
synergies amongst them for improved organizational performance.

6. Monitoring (S3*)-Informal monitoring of operational performance.

7. Adaptation (S4)-Making sense of environmental changes (constraints and opportunities), to shape strategy

 

and long-term orientation.

8. Identity and Closure (S5)-Creating corporate identity, ethos and policies to provide a consistent framework

for operations.

Identifying & assessing the 9. Resource Bargaining (S3-S1) - Negotiating expected results, and matching resources for each of the

interactions within the
system-in-focus

operational units.

decision making.

10. Inter-operational Management (S1-S2-S3) - Managing operational complexity and enabling effective

11. Strategy Development Processes (S4-S3) - Combining internal and external perspectives on feasible and
desirable future developments, to support strategy development for the organisation.

12. Maintaining Balance (S5-S4-S3) - Balancing between present and future orientations and between internal
and external perspectives in order to keep the organisation in homoeostatic balance with its niche.

13. Recursive Governance - Ensuring that each embedded organisation operates as a viable system itself (with
appropriate autonomy to self-govern).

14. Algedonic Signals - Raising alarms to trigger interventions outside of the normal regulatory channels.

cause for concern about doing this and instead we have drawn
on the empirical evidence presented in the literature of the use
of the VSM as a PSM to develop our epistemology. This empirical
grounding also goes some way towards avoiding an absurd inter-
pretation of the constitutive rules presented above where the con-
clusion might be made that an engagement is evaluated as not a
VSM intervention because only the VSM in its functionalist sense
Was used.

Therefore, drawing principally upon Beer (1985), Espejo and
Reyes (2011) and Espinosa and Walker (2017), Schwaninger and
Scheef (2016) we have identified 14 process elements through a
close reading of the sources, grouped into 3 processes of enquiry,
that from experience we find constitute a comprehensive perfor-
mative epistemology for the VSM process. We believe the process
elements we have identified are representative of the range of VSM
practice but not an exact reproduction of the coverage in each of
the sources we analysed, keeping with the requirement to capture
process elements that would be generative of variability of prac-
tice rather than prescriptive of it. Each of these process elements
is presented in Table 2.

The constitutive rules in Table 1 thus provide an action framing,
an interpretive VSM methodology, for the 3 phases of enquiry that
emerge from the epistemology. We focus the remainder of this sec-
tion on a performative description of this epistemology, a descrip-
tion of what the consultant is doing that is specific to the VSM.

3.5. Process representation of the vsm epistemology

We have chosen to express this performative epistemology using
a form of systems modelling called Hierarchical Process Modelling
(HPM). HPM was originally conceived as a systems modelling ap-
proach with a strong process ontology and a calculus for assessing
the probability of system failure (Hall, Blockley, and Davis, 1998).
This modelling approach was developed over a number of years
to support decision making under uncertainty in engineering man-
agement (Davis and Hall, 2003; Fletcher and Davis, 2003; Marashi
and Davis, 2006) and eventually as a modelling approach to sup-
port problem structuring (Davis, MacDonald, and White, 2010).

An HPM is a conceptual model that consists of processes, de-
scribed by verbal nouns,’ structured into a hierarchical arrange-
ment by composition and representing the minimum processes in
a system required to achieve a purpose. The hierarchical label just
describes the representational layout of the model on the page,
the composition of processes in the hierarchical arrangement ac-
tually describes a containment relationship. A superior process on
the page contains inferior processes: these are the sub-processes

4 Gerunds, verbs in the present participle form in English i.e. verbs ending in
‘-ing’; having no subject and where the agent (performer) is not specified and ex-
pressing a continuous present tense. The verbal noun parts of the process descrip-
tions are underlined in Table 2.
1020 D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035

Studying
organisational

Defining the
"system in
focus"

Identifying &
assessing the

2. Levels of
recursive
organisation

3. Operational

Organisational Units (S1)

identity

6. Monitoring

proc

8. Identity ee
(S3*) and closure
(SS) equilibria

   

Identifying &
assessing the
interactions..

9, Resource 10.
bargaining Inter-operatio
al management

11. Strategy
development

13. Recursive
governance

14. Algedonic

Maintaining signals

 

= proc proc

Fig. 2. The representation of the VSM epistemology constitutive rules as a Hierarchical Process Model.°

that are necessary and/or sufficient for the superior process to be
successful. A hierarchical process model can thus be read down the
page as finding successive answers as to how processes are to be
implemented. Conversely, reading up the page provides answers as
to why a process exists. The use of verbal nouns to label processes
reinforces the strong process ontology to the point where almost
anything can be modelled as a process. A simple example is a ‘bus
as a process’, modelled as ‘transporting passengers’. Here, the pro-
cess ontology of the modelling approach affords a postponement
in the reification of the process and preserves working at a con-
ceptual level. The process could be realized by a bus, or anything
else with similar functionality (e.g. taxi, private car, ...) depending
on context and/or further refinement by sub-processes and need
at the time the system needs to be realised. This property of the
labelling of an HPM thus imbues the process description with flex-
ibility and is thus ‘generative’ of interpretations in practical use in
the sense we require of constitutive rules. The representation of
the constitutive rules in Table 2 as an HPM is shown in Fig. 2.

3.6. Evaluating process performance

Hierarchical Process Models have a well-developed performance
measure associated with each process that can be combined, hier-
archically, into an overall assessment of system performance using
Interval Probability Theory (IPT) or its variants (Hall et al., 1998;
Marashi, Davis, and Hall, 2008). The measurement process uses in-
terval numbers to express either beliefs or specific evidence about
the performance of a process. The purpose of using interval num-
bers is to capture or represent fuzziness and incompleteness in our
knowledge. The probability of the proposition EF, the performance
of a process, being true is defined by P(E)=[Sn(E), Sp(E)], where
Sn(E) is the lower bound on that probability and S,(E) is the upper
bound. Thus S,(E) represents the degree with which it is believed
that E is true, 1 —S,(E) the degree with which it is believed that E
is false, and Sp(E)- Sn(E) represents the extent of uncertainty in the
knowledge of the proposition (Hall et al., 1998, p. 248). Therefore,
our range of knowledge spans from complete uncertainty [0.0, 1.0],
to perfect knowledge that the process ‘failed’ [0.0, 0.0], to perfect
knowledge that the process ‘succeeded’ [1.0, 1.0]. Between these
bounds the interval number can be used to define various points
of performance and certainty in our knowledge.

These interval numbers can be expressed graphically using
green for processes performing well, red for processes perform-
ing badly, and white to express the case that performance is un-
known. When combined into a single element this gives rise to the
notation being known colloquially as an Italian Flag,° as shown in
Fig. 3.

Evaluating epistemic claims to membership of the class of VSM
interventions can be decided at an overall level using the appro-
priate algorithm to propagate evidence values ‘up’ the model, or
at the level of individual processes. The ability to express epis-
temic uncertainty, through use of scoring process performance as
‘unknown’, is valuable as none of the answers to the question of
the performance of any given sub-process within the overall VSM
process is likely to be categorical, but more likely to be a measure
of strong or weak performance to a greater or lesser degree. Scor-
ing the model like this presents the evidence in a useful way. The
overall performance of the VSM process in this way will therefore
contribute insight into the question of valid use,’ whereas scor-
ing of individual process performance will contribute to a reflective
(or instructional) understanding of how well the VSM process has
been implemented by looking at the amount of the process model
that has been evaluated as unknown or performing badly.

3.7. Case study assessment method

The assessment method is designed to be carried out by practi-
tioners who deliver the interventions and is thus a self-evaluation
of their performance in executing all the processes in the perfor-
mative model together with a judgement of the certainty of their
evaluation. These are therefore subjective measures and only of
value to the practitioner to help in judging their ‘coverage’ of the
use of the VSM. In order to ensure some degree of consistency
across assessments reported in the following section we developed

> Note that process descriptions in Fig. 2 have been shortened from those shown
in Table 2 and Appendix A to fit them into the boxes of the PeriMeta modelling
software.

© Note that if viewing Figs. 2 to 7 in black and white the Green region will cor-
respond to the grey shading on the left, and the Red region to the slightly darker
grey shading on the right.

7 Thereby answering the existential question originally posed by Checkland and
Scholes about use of SSM.
D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035 1021

P(e)=(1.00,1.00)
r(e)-10.00,0.0) (i s,
Pte=(0.00,1.00)} {|
P(e)=10.25075 i Ti

Fig. 3. Interval Numbers and the Italian Flag Notation.

Judgement of Process Performance

The process performance has been
evaluated with ... Very poor performance Poor performance

Very low uncertainty

Minor uncertainty

Moderate uncertainty | (0.00, d [0.17,0.67]
[0.08,0.83]

High uncertainty [0.00, 0.75]
[0.00, 0.83]

Very high uncertainty

 

[0.00,0.92] [0.00,1.00] [0.08, 1.00]

Neutral performance Good performance Very good performance

0.58
330.83]

[0.17,0.83] [0.17,0.92]

25,1.00]
[0.17,1.00]

Fig. 4. Italian Flag scoring schema for assessing the ‘coverage’ of the VSM epistemology. Interval Numbers are shown for completeness.

a leaf node scoring schema based upon a two-dimensional five-
point Likert scale that combine to produce an overall judgement of
process performance against each process in the VSM epistemol-
ogy as a specific interval number. The first dimension ranks the
practitioner’s self-evaluation of process performance on the scale
Very poor performance, Poor performance, Neutral performance,
Good performance, to Very good performance. The second dimen-
sion ranks the practitioner’s self-evaluation of their confidence
in measuring process performance on the scale Very low uncer-
tainty, Minor uncertainty, Moderate uncertainty, High uncertainty,
to Very high uncertainty. This two-dimensional scale is shown
in Fig. 4 as both the Italian Flag and the corresponding inter-
val number. The scoring schema presents the practitioner with 25
choices for the self-assessment of performance for each of the pro-
cesses in the model. Before finalising their respective assessments,
the practitioners cross-briefed each other on their scores and
supporting rationale to ensure the common application of these
criteria.

The University of Bristol has developed software (PeriMeta) that
enables the drawing of HPMs and the assignment of an interval
number to describe the performance of each process in the model.
The PeriMeta software provides various means for combining in-
terval numbers ‘upwards’ in the HPM according to various propa-
gation algorithms as described in (Marashi et al., 2008). For the as-
sessments presented in the next section the leaf node scores were
aggregated up the hierarchies using the Juniper algorithm in the
PeriMeta software with necessity and sufficiency values set to 0.3
and 0.4 respectively and assuming no dependency between nodes
Marashi et al. (2008). These assumptions and values are based
on heuristics developed from the development of HPM as a PSM
(Davis et al., 2010; Marashi, 2006; Marashi et al., 2008). Whilst
these propagated values give an overall assessment of ‘coverage’ of
the VSM epistemology they are not essential for the replication of
this work by practitioners without access to the PeriMeta software.

We conclude this description of our methodology by stressing
that the value of the approach is not in achieving absolute con-
sistency of self-evaluation between practitioners nor of absolute
determination of overall performance, although the latter can be
achieved simply by use of the PeriMeta software. However, if con-
sistency of self-evaluation is important then it would not be too
difficult to achieve by providing more detail in the model shown
in Fig. 2. The elegance of the use of HPM and the containment

relationship for sub-processes is that models can be extended by
answering the ‘how?’ question for each sub-process in the model.
This can be carried out by the practitioner in as much detail as is
required.

4. Reflecting on practice: case studies

In this section, we detail the applications of VSM in three dis-
tinct settings and reflect upon how each application satisfies the
VSM epistemology defined in the previous section through the use
of a scored HPM. Each case study is drawn from published reports
on VSM engagements by the authors and therefore have already
been accepted as ‘valid’ use of the VSM - case study 1 (Lowe et al.,
2016), case study 2 (Espinosa and Walker, 2013), and case study 3
(Espinosa et al., 2015). Evaluation of the cases has been made us-
ing the three sequential phases of enquiry set out in the definition
of our VSM process epistemology shown in Table 2. Complete de-
tails of the scoring of the individual process elements for each case
is given in Appendix A. Notable performance of process elements
is called-out in each sub-section.

4.1. Case study 1 - Ministry of Defence

In 2014 the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence (MOD) decided
to introduce a strategic business partner within the Defence Infras-
tructure Organisation (DIO) to act as the senior management team
and inject knowledge and expertise developed in the private sec-
tor. The DIO is the part of the MOD that is responsible for building,
maintaining and servicing the infrastructure needed to support the
UK’s Armed Forces and MOD as a whole. It enables MOD personnel
— military and civilian - to live, work, train and deploy both in the
UK and overseas. As part of the preparations for this introduction,
staff at the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) were
tasked to identify the strengths, weaknesses and uncertainties as-
sociated with the operation of the DIO in the context of the wider
MOD Enterprise, together with candidate actions for intervention.
Whilst the task was initially focussed on the DIO, the scope was
expanded through boundary critique to include the elements of
MOD Head Office that provide governance for the operation of the
DIO (‘Governor’ role) and the Armed Forces (and other elements
of MOD such as Defence Equipment and Support) that provide in-
1022 D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035

frastructure requirements for the DIO to deliver against (‘Customer’
role). This broader scope of enquiry was referred to as the Infras-
tructure Delivery System and established the organisational iden-
tity (as per #1 in the performative epistemology).

The Dstl staff designed and implemented a structured approach
to assessment, cognisant of the need to repeat this assessment
over time to track progress. The structure was developed through
the application of an adapted VSM at two different levels to re-
cursively examine the Infrastructure Delivery System in the wider
organisational context of the Defence Enterprise (as per #2 in
the performative epistemology). This adaptation was driven by a
difficulty that participants encountered in discriminating between
Beer’s S3, S3* and S2. They regarded these functions as largely in-
distinguishable within the role of management, and given an op-
portunity to respond to stakeholder feedback (and so strengthen
the participative nature of the work), the Dstl staff elected not to
persist beyond the first meeting in trying to untangle these func-
tions and instead collapsed them into a single layer. The result was
an adapted VSM focused on four key functions (with associated
sub-functions): Strategic Leadership (Beer’s S5); Strategy Formula-
tion (Beer’s S4); Operational Management (Beer’s S3, S3* and S2)
and Operational Delivery (Beer’s S1). The assessments using this
structure were undertaken via two workshops, one focussing on
the Infrastructure Delivery System and the other focussing on the
operational management of the enterprise (of which the infrastruc-
ture delivery systems is but one part).

In each workshop, the relevant sub-systems and the key in-
teractions between them were assessed (as per #3 - #14 in the
performative epistemology) by stepping through the structure out-
lined above and detailed in Lowe et al. (2016). The workshop par-
ticipants were those stakeholders identified as having responsi-
bility for and/or experience of key system elements, as well as
those representing the Infrastructure customer base, principally the
UK’s Armed Services. It was important to ensure that the partic-
ipants were both expert and representative of all sides (i.e. DIO,
Governors and Customers). The role of the Dstl staff was then to
act as a facilitation team to ensure that a balanced assessment
was arrived at and that it was supported by objective evidence
wherever possible (the open questions that were used to guide
the facilitation have been detailed separately - see Appendix A of
Lowe et al. (2016)). Throughout the workshops, participants col-
lectively identified the strengths, unknowns or weaknesses from
their personal perspectives and, after group discussion, each scored
the relative weight of these on a scale and provide explanatory
comments on individual assessment sheets. The scores and com-
ments for each function and sub-function were subsequently col-
lated and an ‘Italian Flag’ was drawn using the median values
calculated from the individual scores. At the end of each work-
shop participants were asked to collectively identify their top pri-
orities for action to either improve performance (and so mini-
mize red assessments) or to reduce uncertainty (minimize white
assessments).

The Italian Flag summaries, supported by evidence statements,
together with the recommended actions were subsequently briefed
to the Senior Customer who had not participated in either work-
shop. He readily accepted the findings and used them to define a
major change programme. Stakeholder feedback confirmed the im-
pact of the approach. For example: “The Dstl work made a real dif-
ference in the success of the Defence Infrastructure System Programme
definition stage. In particular it enabled us to arrive at an agreed ma-
turity model much more quickly than would otherwise have been the
case as many of the key stakeholders had already been through the
thought process that led them to understand the functions within the
system. In addition, your work with them around the Italian Flag as-
sessment resulted in a common understanding of system weaknesses.
This enabled us to reach a rapid and robust consensus as to the cur-

rent state of the Infrastructure System and priorities for corrective ac-
tion.”

Fig. 5 displays our reflection on how this method compares to
the VSM epistemology in a HPM format with the associated aggre-
gations. It can be seen that whilst there is good coverage of the
VSM epistemology (green) there are some shortfalls (red) where
the scope of enquiry could and should be widened to yield bet-
ter coverage. It can also be seen that there is a large degree of
uncertainty (white) and in particular with regard to ‘Identifying &
assessing the five sub-systems’ and ‘Identifying & assessing the in-
teractions within the system-in-focus’. This is due to the evidence
gathered via the workshop being subjective in nature (stakeholder
expert opinions) with only limited triangulation possible within
the time available. Despite these shortcomings in coverage and
depth, the bespoke method developed for this context can be seen
to be representative of VSM practice.

4.2. Case study 2 - Ecovillage

The Ecovillage (EV) is a community developed in Ireland, in-
tended to demonstrate that it is possible to build and live in a fully
sustainable way, and operating in a non-hierarchical, self-organised
and still effective way. From the beginning, the EV members de-
cided to self-organise inspired in cooperatives’ principles as many
of them came from a cooperative background. Each new mem-
ber would subscribe to existing working groups, to contribute to
the project’s development. Nevertheless, they were experiencing
the tyranny of structureless, in a time in which the Irish economy
was struggling, and they had pressures to progressing towards a
more effective way of self-organisation, to complete the project’s
development. This is why during 2007-2010 Espinosa and Walker
(2013) came as academic consultants leading a VSM project to sup-
port self-organisation while increasing organisational cohesion and
performance. The General Assembly, in effect the democratic man-
agement body of the Ecovillage, approved their approach to or-
ganisational self-transformation as a learning process to agree on
the key organisational tasks, rand the required roles and inter-
actions to implement them effectively. During the first year the
academic consultants visited regularly the EV and facilitated VSM
workshops to go through all the stages of the Self Transformation
methodology. Each of the workshops were facilitated by the con-
sultants with the aim to reach agreement upon core structural and
process changes required; and how they should be implemented.
A Process Group with four community members facilitated im-
plementation of the core agreed changes in continuous interac-
tions with the consultants. After the first few years, all the stages
of the ‘Self Transformation Methodology’ had been completed, an
important amount of group learning about their organisation has
been reported, and several changes and innovations had been im-
plemented improving the community organisation. Espinosa and
Walker (2013) provide a detailed report of the methodology used,
the results achieved, and the impact of the intervention. Here we
discuss the way the VSM methodology used resembles our sug-
gested epistemology.

The first phase of enquiry was covered in the first workshop,
when the consultants facilitated an agreement between the par-
ticipants about the EV’s identity. This was relatively straightfor-
ward, as the EV members had already discussed the EV identity
extensively and there were not many apparent disagreements on
it (this is represented in Box 1, by a compact green line). The sec-
ond part of the workshop a more extensive discussion took place
to agree on the operational activities (Systems 1) as distinct to
meta-systemic activities. The members recognised their primary
tasks (e.g. building individual houses, developing the infrastruc-
ture), were underpopulated by volunteers, while many other mem-
bers were spending too much time and energy on less relevant ac-
D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035 1023

Studying
organisatonal
Functions
using ¥SM

Identifying &
assessing the
sub-systems

1 2. Levels of

 

ae : 3. Operational ;

Organisational rOOUrve Units (51) Harmonisation

identity organisation (52)

> proc > proc

6. Monitoring 7. Adaptation

(S3*) (S4)
Lt

> proc > proc

 

Self-requiatio

 

 

 
 
      
   
 

 
 

Identifying &
assessing the
interactions

  
  

   
   
 

5 11. Strategy

development

9, Resource
bargaining

12. 13. Recursive
Maintaining governance

8. Identity
and closure
(SS)

14. Algedonic
signals

equilibria

 

& proc > proc > proc > proc

Fig. 5. Reflection on method developed for the MOD context.

Defining the
“system in
focus"

Identifying &
assessing the
sub-systems

 
  
 

1. 2. Levels of 3. Operational :
Organisational recursive Units (S1) Harmonisation
identity organisation (52)

 

> proc > proc

6. Monitoring 7. Adaptation
(S3*) (54)
a Ld
> proc > proc

      
     
      
    
 
   
     
    

 

  
 
      
     
   

  

Identifying &
assessing the
interactions

  
   

 
   
 
  

5

; 9, Resource
Self-requlatio

bargaining

11. Strategy
development

  

     

Inter-operatio
al management

> proc > proc > proc

   

13. Recursive
governance

8. Identity
and closure
(SS)

ey
Maintaining

14. Algedonic
signals
equilibria

 

> proc > proc > proc > proc

 

Fig. 6. Reflection on method developed for the EV context.

tivities. They reorganised their working teams to cover up System
1 tasks and to re-balancing participation on meta-systemic roles,
which once implemented begun to show very positive effects on
their capability to self-govern - see Fig. 6, Process 2 showing pre-
dominantly high coverage, with low uncertainty.

The second stage of enquiry happened over the next two work-
shops, when they reflected about their recurrent interactions be-
tween S1s and their meta-systemic roles and processes (S2 to S5).
They identified and resolved S2 shortages e.g. lack of coordination
and recurrent conflicts amongst members - see Fig. 6, Processes 3
and 4, showing mostly good coverage with little uncertainty. They
agreed the need to redesign the S3 role, and appointed a man-
ager who took this role following VSM criteria - see Processes 5
and 6 showing a good level of coverage with minor uncertainty.

The members also reflected on their interactions about strategy
and policy. They reckoned the Board of Directors were overdoing
their role and micro-managing and re-designed these roles accord-
ingly, which had positive results - see Fig. 6, Process 8 showing
very good coverage and little uncertainty. Only by the end of the
second year the members questioned their adaptation capabilities
and develop more robust S4 roles and mechanisms, which is re-
flected in Process 7 showing less coverage, and larger uncertainty.

In the third stage of enquiry, they made additional efforts to
identify and address the S1 vs S3 interactions, but more could had
been achieved regarding resource bargaining - see Process 9 show-
ing good coverage but medium uncertainty. Inter operational man-
agement (S1/S3) and maintaining balance (S3/S4) was clearly ad-
dressed through the new ‘Coordination Meetings’ with represen-
1024 D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035

tatives from all S1s, dealing with S3 and S4 issues in the design
of the agendas - see the very good coverage and little uncertainty
in Processes 10 and 12. Processes 11, 13 and 14 reveal that even
if the interactions $3/S4, S3/S4/S5, and the management of alge-
donics were covered in this late stage of the methodology, there
was a medium level of uncertainty as S4 remained underdevel-
oped, leaving several ‘outside and then’ issues still unresolved and
not operating algedonic signals early enough.

Additional field research conducted by Cardoso evidenced that
most people felt the changes had been positive. In the words of
one of the members: “I don’t know to what extent this is due to the
VSM but there seem to be a reduction in the number of difficult inter-
personal relationship situations and improvement in our ability to re-
solve these. The eco-community seems to have become a more com-
fortable place” (Espinosa, Cardoso, Arcaute, and Christensen, 2011).

As seen in Fig. 6 this VSM intervention yielded, in general, ex-
cellent coverage albeit with some shortcomings and uncertainties.
However, despite these shortcomings, the methodology used can
be seen to be highly representative of VSM practice.

4.3. Case study 3 - Latin American Corporation

Latin American Corporation (LAC)® is a large construction com-
pany in Colombia, focused on: office buildings; popular housing;
roads and infrastructure; shopping centres, and jails. In 2013 LAC
decided to progress their recently agreed strategy to expand op-
erations to a few other countries in Latin American market. They
hired a team of experts from Los Andes University School of Man-
agement to facilitate the alignment of their organisational struc-
ture with this strategy. The team, led by two senior consultants,
with support from two then doctoral students started the project
by doing a preliminary survey about strengths and limitations of
the current structure, amongst a large number of workers (the
company had around 5000 workers, of which around 1000 were
permanent and the rest were sub-contracted for specific building
projects). The team decided to design the project using the VSM,
given the client’s desire to follow a systemic approach to strategy
implementation, and the proven strength of the VSM to support
structural changes.

Based on preliminary survey findings and following VSM the-
ory, the consulting team developed a structured survey and semi-
structured interviews. For the survey they sent 300 questionnaires
to people from different roles, from the different regions and coun-
tries where LAC was operating. The consulting team received more
than 200 responses, which they used to conduct an in depth VSM
diagnosis. They complemented the survey responses with more
than 40 semi-structured interviews with a representative from
each type of role from the different regions and project types. This
allowed the team to identify the improvements to the current or-
ganisation most necessary to get it ready for expansion as planned.

To facilitate LAC’s learning process about their required struc-
tural changes, the consulting team created an Executive Commit-
tee and a Technical Committee which organised and participated
in the VSM workshops facilitated by the consulting team. Details of
the process, methodology, results and impact have been provided
in Espinosa et al. (2015). There follows a reflection on how this
VSM methodology resembles our suggested epistemology.

The first stage of enquiry started by secondary research into
the company policy, strategy and current structure, and the design
and delivery of interviews and a survey. The consultants suggested
a draft definition of identity and a draft unfolding of complexity,
to start up the discussions hold at the first workshop; it included
more than forty participants representing all the regional and in-

8 LAC is a pseudonym used to protect the company’s identity.

ternational branches, all types of projects, and key meta-systemic
roles. While there wasn’t much doubts on the agreed identity, de-
ciding on a useful way of representing existing levels of organisa-
tion was far more challenging and demanded lots of (very fruitful)
debate - see Fig. 7 expressing this as clearly high coverage with
little uncertainty.

The second stage of enquiry successfully identified the main
primary and meta-systemic roles and their patterns of interaction,
using information from the surveys and the interviews, in an ‘ex-
pert mode.’ The resulting analysis of the interviews and surveys
were ‘decodified’ into non VSM language and extensively discussed
in the second day of the first workshop, to collectively decide on
key changes identified for LAC. Fig. 7 illustrates this stage of en-
quiry as having a very good coverage and little uncertainty - even
if more could had been done regarding S3*.

The technical team subsequently met regularly to identify pos-
sible action paths for adjusting current structures and to align
them with their agreed strategy, developing in this way the third
stage of enquiry. After a couple of months of debate and discus-
sions with the directive team, a proposal for restructuring was
agreed, that included designing and running a prototype of a re-
designed process for a building project - their lowest recursive
level of organisation. During the second workshop the participants
worked in teams to generate agreements about the new struc-
tures, roles, processes and teams required to implement the strat-
egy. Both workshops benefited from having established a good
evidence-based data set from the team’s preliminary analysis of
Surveys and interviews, and from the use of qualitative analysis
software to collect and understand the data. It happened as a con-
tinued interaction between consultants and the Technical Commit-
tee, preparing a draft reorganisation proposal, including a proto-
type of the project’s organisation, which addressed the main prob-
lems of interaction between roles. Participants in the second work-
shop discussed the prototype of the redesigned building process
and agreed on additional changes to create a proper context for
LAC’s expansive strategy’s implementation. Fig. 7, Processes 9, 10,
11 and 13 confirm this phase was properly covered and left lit-
tle uncertainty. Retrospectively it looks as if more could had been
done analysing the S3/S4 homeostat and emerging algedonic sig-
nals, as shown in the larger uncertainty on Processes 12 and 14.

The first workshop assessments showed a highly positive re-
view from participants: more than 70% of them valued very pos-
itively their leaning about their structure and strategy alignment,
felt highly committed to implement the agreed changes, and ap-
preciated highly the opportunities for group agreements offered
by the VSM methodology used. The second workshop also brought
very positive results and more than 80% of participants expressed
an even higher commitment to implementation of agreed changes.

In Fig. 7 we can confirm that this VSM intervention yielded
high coverage with very few shortcomings and only minor or mod-
erate uncertainty for an excellent overall process assessment. This
reconfirms that the ‘Self Transformation Methodology’ (Espinosa
and Walker, 2017) can be considered compatible with VSM theory.

4.4. Cross case learning

Whilst in all three cases the interventions can be seen to be
representative of VSM practice, with strengths heavily outweigh-
ing the weaknesses and uncertainties, there is significant variation
that is interesting to explore. We do this both from the perspec-
tive of the learning that each engagement can communicate into
the community of VSM practice but also at the meta level of the
roll that the performative epistemology plays (as expressed in the
process models) in supporting the constitutive rules to achieve this
methodological ‘learning across’.
D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035 1025

   

Studying
organisatonal
Functions
vSM

Identifying &
assessing the
sub-systems

Defining the
"system in
focus"

   
 

3. Operational
Units (51)

2, Levels of
recursive
organisation

  

Harmonisation
(S2)

Organisational
identity

 

6. Monitoring 7. Adaptation
(53*) (54)

   
  
 

proc A. proc

  
    
   

  
 
   
  
      
  
   
     

Self-requlatio

and closure

Identifying &
assessing the
interactions

   
 

   
   
 

  
  

5 9, Resource

bargaining

11, Strategy
development

  

   
  

Inter-operatio

n and al management

  
    
 

   
  

   
   

   
  
 

  
 

8. Identity 12,
Maintaining

equilibria

14, Algedonic
signals

13. Recursive
governance

 

(55)

 
 

> proc > proc proc A. @proc

Fig. 7. Reflection on method developed for the LAC context.

Setting aside defining the system in focus, which was done
well in all cases, the degree to which the interventions identi-
fied and assessed the sub-systems and the interactions between
them increase from MOD to EV to LAC. This variation may be at-
tributable to the degree of participation in each case study, where
the VSM approaches followed in the MOD and EV cases stud-
ies were adapted to incorporate participant feedback, the LAC ap-
proach had less participation (through only two workshops) so ex-
pert consultants had a freer role in design and implementation.
While participation and adaptations are often critical to exploita-
tion of such studying, they make the alignment with VSM distinc-
tions and principles more challenging, as participants need to learn
such distinctions to contribute to the analysis.

The degree to which the MOD case study aligns with VSM dis-
tinctions and principles is less than for the other two case stud-
ies. This correlates with the experience levels of the VSM consul-
tants but could also be due to contextual constraints. For example,
the MOD intervention was constrained by time which meant that
the team was only afforded limited access to the stakeholder com-
munity and this is reflected in the universally higher uncertainty
scores. This is in stark contrast to the EV intervention which took
place over multiple years with very high levels of access and the
LAC intervention which used organisation-wide surveys to bring
stakeholder perspectives into workshops.

Overall, the identification and assessment of interactions be-
tween sub-systems was covered to a lesser degree than the iden-
tification and assessment of the sub-systems themselves. This is
very common in VSM interventions and is reflected in the Ital-
ian Flag evaluations shown in all three cases, but in mitigation
this is also true of some of the theoretical propositions focussed
on the understanding of VSM theory in the identification of the
key elements, rather than the interactions between them (e.g.
(Schwaninger and Scheef, 2016)).

The assessments presented in Appendix A clearly demonstrate
that the performative model of the VSM epistemology developed
in Section 3 can be operationalised in an intuitive manner with
a result that contributes to the practitioner reflecting on (their)
practice. From a problem structuring perspective, those processes
that were not performed well and/or with a high degree of un-

certainty provide the focus for the practitioners’ methodological
learning concerning use of the VSM. The assessment for the MOD
case clearly reflects the original questioning reported by Lowe et
al. (2016) about how far a VSM practitioner can ‘deviate’ in the
use of the VSM for the intervention to be considered as a valid
use of it. Here, we can turn the question around and regard the
constitutive rules and the performative epistemology as being gen-
erative of the practitioners’ behaviour. Therefore, the assessments
for the LAC and EV case studies are also evidence that the consti-
tutive rules and performative epistemology are generative of more
‘conventional’ use of the VSM in problem structuring practice and
thus we can rule out the combination leading to absurd conclu-
sions. The combination of the constitutive rules and performative
epistemology for VSM practice thus is seen to fulfil the mechanism
for ‘learning across’ that we see in our review. It also opens an in-
teresting research path; to compare and contrast a wider range of
VSM interventions using our suggested epistemology to generate
deeper and more robust insights into practice grounded in the use
of the VSM.

5. Discussion

Our original research questions were concerned with how the
VSM is used in practice and how much adaptation is acceptable
before the model being used to support interventions, in terms
of organisational and process design, is no longer considered to
be the VSM. These questions mirrored the existential concern of
Checkland and Scholes for SSM. Since actual use of the VSM in
practice suggests both a departure from its ‘apparent’ functional-
ist roots and deviations from its precise structure thus leading to
questions about just how far it is possible to adapt the VSM be-
fore it either ceases to have meaning or, worse, is a dangerous
departure leading the practitioner into uncharted territory. These
are not new questions, they echo long-standing concerns about
how the VSM is being used in practice. In his most recent writing
on VSM philosophy and theory Jackson (2019, pp. 299-311) notes
that he first commented on the “battle for the ‘soul of the VSM”
(pp307) in (1992). In this earlier research note, Jackson states that
the functionalist interpretation of how to use the VSM is “sensi-
1026 D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035

bly rejected by sophisticated users of the model” and argues for ac-
cepting a structuralist, over interpretivist, understanding of its use.
However, the emergence of pluralism and routine use of multi-
methodology in the intervening years has led Jackson (2019) to his
position that the functionalist core of the VSM model can be inte-
grated into a generic interpretivist methodology, which has led to
the approach we have taken in this paper.

However, despite this continued use of constitutive rules and
their undoubted pedagogic benefit, little has been said about the
generative property of constitutive rules and their effect on a
community of practice ‘grounded’ in a specific intervention tech-
nique such as the VSM. Searle’s original work on constitutive rules
(Searle, 1995) and the example he provides of the emergence of
constitutive (as opposed to regulative) rules for the game of chess
(ibid, pp. 27-28), highlights the need for a more sophisticated ap-
preciation of their value to analysis. Superficially, it would seem
that a game is either a game of chess or it is not - ie. a binary
categorisation - and it is the constitutive rules that actually define
the game ‘chess’. However, many variants of the game of chess ex-
ist, and we see that a fundamental property of constitutive rules is
to foster their continuous and ongoing interpretation i.e. the most
important characteristic of constitutive rules is that they have gen-
erative properties. We would therefore expect the constitutive rules
for the VSM to be similarly generative of a wide range of practice,
which indeed is the fact established empirically by our extensive
review and then examined in detail via the three case studies pre-
sented above. Thus, central to the idea of formulating constitutive
rules for a VSM process is the filling of a gap in our knowledge be-
tween current practice and the existing literature about the VSM
i.e. codifying the constitutive rules that have generated this vari-
ability in practice. Indeed, a key aspect of any PSM use is method-
ological learning (Yearworth and White, 2014, p. 939) and there-
fore conclude that these constitutive rules must exist, they are the
primary cause of both the diversity of moves made by VSM practi-
tioners and the enabler of ‘learning across’ behaviours.

Our research questions thus developed to embrace the idea of
exploring how the VSM is actually being used in practice as a
PSM, and with what variability, through the standardized analysis
of three case studies. To do this, we adopted a performative stance
and asked the question - what is it that a VSM practitioner is do-
ing when they are using the VSM as a PSM? By developing con-
stitutive rules and an explicit epistemology for the VSM we were
able to express a performative model, expressed as an HPM that
could be used in two different ways; either as a means of guiding
the practice of the consultant (‘designing’) or supporting method-
ological learning or (‘reflecting’). Using this specific performative
interpretation of the VSM process offers a better context for the
practitioner to more precisely judge their performance in assess-
ing organisational diagnostic archetypes, as Beer and others sug-
gested (Espinosa and Walker, 2017, pp. 485-492). Deficiency in one
or more areas of the model - that is, evaluations of process perfor-
mance that appeared predominately in the very poor performance
to very high uncertainty sections of Fig. 4- would be an indication
that some aspect of the VSM was not being used, or perhaps the
absence was just due to the focus of the practitioner being placed
elsewhere. If the performative model is treated as a device to help
reflect on practice, then the practitioner would be able to decide
for themselves whether this was a weakness, deliberate omission,
or oversite. The model just flags up the need for attention. Again,
we emphasise that a practitioner does not have to satisfy all 14
processes to be confident of having used the VSM as a PSM ap-
propriately, just to be confident of having used it comprehensively.
This affordance (i.e. being comprehensive) would be most relevant
to a novice practitioner, because an expert practitioner would be
more likely to home in on the problem area very quickly. This is

very much how Checkland viewed the use of the constitutive rules
for SSM (Checkland, 1981, pp. 252-254),

The use of the performative model to evaluate three recent
cases studies has demonstrated the model being used in this re-
flexive mode. It is clear from the scored HPMs that whilst the
performance of the top-level process (Studying organisational func-
tions using VSM distinctions and principles) is qualitatively similar
in each case - mostly green, some white and some red, the varia-
tion that exists across case studies is a useful stimulus for method-
ological learning. We find that whilst the precise quantitative mea-
sures of overall performance that have been extracted are interest-
ing, the real value comes from using the measures into the assess-
ment of performance at the 14 ‘leaf nodes’, especially where per-
formance is either categorically highly uncertain or categorically
poor. Whilst the top-level measures provide a figure of merit on
overall performance of the consultant using the methodology it is
the leaf node assessments that are the most important feature of
the model when used reflexively.

The idea of using a process model with an explicit represen-
tation of process performance to construct a performative episte-
mology is apparently innovative in the field of Soft OR/PSMs and
we can see no reason why it could not be applied to other specific
epistemologies such as that developed for SSM by Checkland and
Scholes. For example, one area of further work could be to trans-
late the guide to cognitive mapping compiled by Ackermann and
Eden (2011a, pp. 315-330), to support their SODA/JourneyMaking
methodology, into a performative epistemology expressed as an
HPM. Another area for further work is to explore the idea of cat-
egorical failure i.e. if any of the leaf-node processes have very
poor coverage then that should lead to the overall assessment
that the consultant’s intervention has not been consistent with
the VSM. The current model when implemented in software uses
the Juniper algorithm with default values for necessity and suffi-
ciency (Fletcher and Davis, 2003; Marashi, 2006; Marashi et al.,
2008), however a more stringent test for validity can be obtained
by using a necessity value approaching 1.0, which has the ef-
fect of strongly propagating poor performance through the model
(Yearworth, Lowe, Schien, and Walworth, 2015).

Another finding from this work is the role that constitutive
rules play in binding the VSM community of practice together and
enabling it to learn across applications in disparate contexts. In ad-
dition to the benefits to VSM pedagogy seen from the case stud-
ies, we see that constitutive rules do not just generate the range
of empirical examples of VSM work that we see reported but also
define the extent or boundary of what might be considered as legit-
imate VSM consultancy. These constitutive rules are part and par-
cel of the creation of the social ontology of VSM practice (Searle,
2006). Until now, the role that constitutive rules have been play-
ing in PSM practice generally has not been made explicit. Whilst
Checkland (1981, pp. 252-254), Checkland and Scholes (1990, pp.
284-290), Jackson (2001; 2003, pp. 305-311; 2019, pp. 601-604),
and Yearworth and White (2014) have all made explicit reference
to their use this has mostly been concerned with pedagogic, exis-
tential and methodological concerns. Using Searle’s lens of social
ontology on a VSM community of practice leads us to return to
our original research aims and look at the role of the constitu-
tive rules in re-interpreting our original research question as “what
counts as VSM practice?” The constitutive rules we have surfaced
can thus be seen as the generative mechanism that leads to the
performative actions undertaken by individual practitioners when
engaged in the VSM consulting process, and by which actions the
VSM community of practice knows and recognises itself. We be-
lieve that further codification of VSM practice would be a useful
endeavour, both to improve our methodological understanding of
what it is that VSM practitioners are doing when they are working
D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035 1027

with clients, but also to set our understanding on more a rigorous
observational basis.

Mutual recognition of what counts as something is central
to a social ontology. Therefore, the constitutive rules described
here help define what a client might expect from a consultant
who claims to be delivering a ‘VSM’ engagement. This expectation
would be formalised into a statement of the obligations, duties, re-
quirements, rights etc. - which Searle (2006, p. 18) refers to as de-
ontic powers — that would need to exist between the client and the
consultant for the engagement to take place. A comprehensive re-
view of these deontic powers in the social ontology of operational
research consultancy in general has been provided by the Transfor-
mation Competence Perspective (TCP) (Ormerod, 2008).

We find that constitutive rules are generative of the variabil-
ity in problem structuring practice and that the specificity of that
practice being labelled as a VSM engagement is dependant on the
degree with which the Italian Flag evidence in the HPM is confir-
matory. The acceptable boundaries on variability (in problem struc-
turing) and specificity (to the VSM) will in all likelihood emerge
from the ongoing negotiation between the client and consultant
concerning the nature of the engagement. The essence of our de-
ontological argument, building on Searle (2006, p. 18), is grounded
in a solid view of competence of the OR practitioner (Ormerod,
2008). However, we can also see that what we find out about in
terms of ‘what counts’ to the client will eventually come down to
practitioner’s reflections on an engagement and what they choose
to say about it in publication. From the client’s perspective, they
are unlikely to be concerned with the questions addressed in this
paper and instead will be focussed on issues of trust and mutual
agreement on the criteria for judging a ‘successful’ intervention
(Tully, White, & Yearworth, 2018). Further, we can also see that
both client and consultant would experience an ’holistic’ VSM en-
gagement without this manufactured separation between interpre-
tivist constitutive rules and a VSM epistemology and their joining
together as multimethodology. VSM practice is inherently a multi-
methodology. However, we have introduced this analytical separa-
tion between the problem structuring part and the VSM epistemol-
ogy precisely because we needed to understand how the former’s
constitutive rules are generative of the range of engagement prac-
tice, whereas the epistemology is generative of the degree of VSM-
ness. We therefore finally return to questions of pluralism, multi-
methodology, and the Soft OR project. We believe the conclusions
from our work tell us that pluralism is important and that multi-
methodology is still the most practicable way of delivering inter-
ventions in complex systems. Mixing approaches is not just lim-
ited to the engagement itself but also in the process of method-
ological learning (Yearworth and White, 2014). In his treatment

of VSM philosophy and theory Jackson (2019, pp. 299-311) refers
specifically to the concept of the VSM as an hermeneutic enabler
and notes that the recent methodological developments by Espejo
and Reyes (2011) and Espinosa and Walker (2017) have “sought
to “soften” the way the approach is used as a means of easing the
problems often associated with its implementation.” We believe that
Jackson (2019, p. 525) would regard this work as an example of
‘enhanced OR’, but we are comfortable with its positioning as Soft
OR. We see the main contribution of this work as supporting prac-
titioners by encouraging the wider and better use of the VSM in
preparing organisations to maintain performance in uncertain fu-
tures.

6. Conclusions

This work has addressed a gap in the knowledge base about
the constitutive rules that underpin VSM practice. It is these gen-
erative rules that account for the variability practice that we have
observed empirically in our review and in the assessment of three
case studies. The casting of an explicit epistemology for the VSM
performatively as an HPM has provided a means for assessing the
specificity of a particular intervention being considered as a VSM
engagement - supported through the use of evidence as interval
numbers and propagation of that evidence in the HPM. The com-
bination of variability in problem structuring and specificity to the
VSM afforded by the constitutive rules and the performative epis-
temology in combination provides insight into the social ontology
of VSM practice and the boundaries of what should be considered
acceptable practice from a competence perspective.

Acknowledgements

Hierarchical Process Modelling (HPM) was used extensively in
the training of Engineers on the EngD in Systems Programme
at the University of Bristol 2009-2018, as funded by the EP-
SRC Industrial Doctorate Centre in Systems (Grant EP/G037353/1).
This work was also supported in part by the EU H2020-SCC-2015
(691,735) project REPLICATE (REnaissance of Places with Innovative
Citizenship and TEchnology).

Appendix A
Defence infrastructure case study assessments
The assessments made for the Defence Infrastructure case study

against the VSM epistemology (together with the associated sup-
porting rationale) are displayed below in Table Al.
1028 D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035

Table A1
Reflection and self-assessment on method developed for the Defence Infrastructure context

VSM Epistemology
1. Organisational Identity |

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

The purpose of the organization was clearly established and set in the context of the wider enterprise.
Stakeholder involvement was comprehensive but not exhaustive (workshop participant limited to key
representatives only).

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

The sub-organisations responsible for delivering key VSM _ functions were identified and their
contributions assessed in the workshop settings. The operation of the DIO was set in wider context of the
MOD enterprise

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

The ability of the operational units to deal with the variety of their environments was assessed but the
evidence gathered was subjective with only limited triangulation possible.

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

The ability of the DIO to coordinate the operations of primary units so as to avoid conflict was assessed
but the evidence gathered was subjective with only limited triangulation possible.

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

The ability of the DIO to support self-regulation of the operational units and to realise synergies between
them in order to meet stakeholder needs was assessed but the evidence gathered was subjective with only
limited triangulation possible.

6. Monitoring(S3*) CULO

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

The ability of the DIO to monitor performance independently of management communication channels
was assessed but the evidence gathered was subjective with only limited triangulation possible.

7. Adaptation (S4) CULE

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

The ability of the DIO to understand its external environment and to identify the implications for its
current and future operations was assessed but the evidence gathered was subjective with only limited
triangulation possible.

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

The ability of the DIO to establish a clear identity and to produce policy that provides a consistent
framework for its operation was assessed but the evidence gathered was subjective with only limited
triangulation possible.

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

The ability of the DIO to allocate and balance resources in accordance with was assessed but the ability
of operational units to negotiate these expected results was not. As before the evidence gathered was
subjective with only limited triangulation possible.

10. Inter-operational Management (S1-S2-S3)

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

The ability of the DIO to leverage information systems in order to inform decision making was a major
focus of the assessments but the interplay between S3 and S2 was not explicitly addressed (recall that Beer’s

 

(continued on next page)
D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035

Table A1 (continued)

S2, S3 and S3* were collapsed into a single layer). Also, as before the evidence gathered was subjective
with only limited triangulation.

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

The ability of the DIO to make strategy by combining both external and internal perspectives was
assessed but the evidence gathered was subjective with only limited triangulation possible.

Limited coverage (green) with major shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

The ability of the DIO to balance ‘inside and now’ against ‘outside and then’ was only partially
assessed. Also, as before the evidence gathered was subjective with only limited triangulation.
13. Recursive Governance

Limited coverage (green) with major shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

The autonomy afforded to sub organisations within the DIO was assessed but this was not a major focus
of inquiry. Also, as before the evidence gathered was subjective with only limited triangulation.

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

The ability of individuals and sub-organisations within the DIO to transmit alarm signals outside
management communication channels and so trigger interventions was assessed but the evidence gathered
was subjective with only limited triangulation possible.

 

1029
1030 D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035
EcoVillage case study assessments

The assessments made for the Ecovillage (EV) case study against the VSM epistemology (together with the associated supporting ratio-
nale) are displayed below in Table A2.

Table A2
Reflection and self-assessment on method developed for the EV context

VSM Epistemology
1. Organisational Identity |

Excellent coverage (green) with very low uncertainty (white)

The first stage of the first workshop was to decide on the organisational identity. As the EV had
developed several workshops to agree on their vision and mission, this stage was done promptly and the
identity statement later ratified at their General Assembly.

2. Levels of recursive organisation

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

The first workshop also resulted in agreements about the levels of organised primary activities of the
EV. This produced a dramatic change as they agreed on their main primary activities — at that stage of
development of the community, and shortly after reorganised themselves accordingly; this replaces the self-
appointed way of belonging to teams they used to use before that has left many gaps in accountability for
primary operational tasks requiring participants.

a

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

In the next workshops participants developed a first assessment of the operational shortages of the newly
formed S1s, focusing on understanding the way each team dealt with environmental variety, have access to
required resources, and exercise their autonomy for decision making. The core issues delimiting operational
performance at each level of organisation were discussed and prioritised by each team's participant.
Between the consulting workshops, operational managers and coordinators started to implement the
suggested changes and to generate better spaces for collective decisions inside the teams.

4. Harmonisation(S2)

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

Even if the EV members shared a very strong sustainable ethos, translated into their eco-charter and that
in itself created a less conflictive decision environment, they realised the many ways in which better
information sharing, process standards and collective knowledge and information management could be
improved and implemented most of the agreed changes over time.

5. Self-regulation and Synergies (S3)_

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

A continuous difficulty faced by the community members was the lack of more effective S3, in
particular, regarding accountability and resource negotiations. Over time they created the Coordination
Meeting, which included a representative from each S3 meeting regularly to inform progress and request
support to address ongoing difficulties or challenges. They also developed other S3 mechanisms for
managing resources and responding to the Assembly on operational results. There were suggestions to
develop a more effective performance management system, but it didn’t get fully implemented.

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and minor uncertainty (white)

During the workshops, we identified situations that were getting out of control and suggested monitoring
mechanisms to generate early alarms to managers. Some of them were put into practice during the
intervention.

7. Adaptation(S4)

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and major uncertainty (white)

One of the main agreements was on the need to develop the nearly non-existent S4 roles and
mechanisms. By the end of the second year the consultants participated in a strategy workshop which helped
to address their needs for innovation and further development. More formal S4 related roles were decided
and implemented.

 

(continued on next page)
D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035 1031

Table A2 (continued)

8. Identity and Closure (S5)

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

All the EV members shared a strong sustainability ethos which is at the heart of the community identity,
their main S5 mechanisms, the Assembly (inc. all members) and the Board (elected by the members every
two years) worked transparently and democratically. The VSM diagnosis identified as one core diagnostic
point the Board micromanaging; and that was corrected over time.

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and minor uncertainty (white)

Existing resource bargaining needed improvements in general, as well as the accountability systems and
processes. The process group leaded development of better structured, more agile and inclusive decision-
making schemes. Some of them however were never fully implemented.

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

Most of the core identified weaknesses were about the decision making and information management
support for the S1 S2 S3 inter-operational management. ee oe

a

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

Evidence of lack of a strong S3-S4 process was assessed and solutions for a more inclusive and
innovative decision process were agreed, including the creation of a Navigation Team (S4) and the
adjustment of Coordination meetings, by including S3 and S4 issues in the agenda for each meeting.

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

The VSM project identified and supported changes in this homeostatic mechanism in particular in the
relationships between the Coordination Group, the new Navigation Group, and the Board. However, the lack
of development of proper S4 roles and mechanisms left this aspect not fully unattended during the first
stages of the VSM intervention.

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

As the intervention was done during the ecovillage’s development project, the emphasis was on the only
existing level of recursive organisation. Nevertheless, after the 3" year, new levels of organised complexity
have emerged and we supported initial rethinking about the embedded levels of recursive organisation.

14. Algedonic Signals

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

During the workshops some examples of algedonic signals were discussed; over time a few mechanisms
to identify them and deal with them were also discussed and implemented.

 
1032 D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035
Latin american corporation case study assessments

The assessments made for the Latin American Corporation (LAC) case study against the VSM epistemology (together with the associated
supporting rationale) are displayed below in Table A3.

Table A3
Reflection and self-assessment on method developed for the LAC context

VSM Epistemolog
1. Organisational Identity | |

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

The first stage of the first workshop was to decide on the organisational identity. As LAC has recently
agreed their espoused identity (including vision and mission) this stage was done very effectively without
major disagreements among representatives of all the stakeholders.

2. Levels of Recursive Organisation oe

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

Several sessions on the first workshop focused on collective agreements about the levels of recursive
organisation. Facilitated by the VSM team, small groups discussed first, the levels of recursive organisation
and agreed on a way of mapping them. Once agreed the recursive mapping, small teams discussed the
diagnostic points per operational units; and prioritised them (using an Italian flag's colour code). Very
intense discussions and considerations about the different mappings took place. A final mapping integrating
the most useful suggestions was then agreed and used as the basis for later analyses.

3. Operational Units (S1)

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

An in-depth assessment of main challenges and dilemmas faced by Sls, at each level of organisation
was the focus of the afternoon session on the 1“ day of the 1°. Workshop. Previous cybernetic analysis of
Sl, using the collected data, was focused on understanding: variety management of S1; availability of
resources and skills to do their tasks; levels of autonomy for decision making. The core issues delimiting
operational performance at each level of organisation were discussed and prioritised by each team's
participant.

4. Harmonisation(S2) 0 |

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

As many problems found at LAC happened through lack of autonomy at the operational level, there was
a generalised feeling that more could be done on issues as coordinating agendas and criteria between for
example, design and building teams, sales and building teams, purchasing and building teams. In depth
discussions happened in both workshops around the identified issues and possible solutions or required
changes.

5. Self-regulation and Synergies ($3) |

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

In depth discussions around ways to improve current interactions between the managerial teams and the
operational management teams was conducted. Some of the suggested solutions required of more in-depth
organisational changes (e.g. clarification of relationships and communication mechanisms between building
an investment sectors of the businesses) which were commanded for further study to a team of volunteers,
sometimes including the VSM consultants.

6. Monitoring(S3*) a

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and moderate uncertainty (white)

Monitoring mechanisms and practices were assessed in the survey and interview and were discussed in
the workshop. Some solutions and proposals to improve existing mechanisms and practice were agreed.

7. Adaptation(S4)

Excellent coverage (green) with moderate uncertainty (white)

One of the main agreements was on the need to improve S4 roles and mechanisms, in particular the
Innovation and Creativity roles. Very precise and detailed recommendations for the development of new
innovation and corporate education roles were agreed through the workshops and further elaborated
afterwards.

8. Identity and Closure (S5) | |

(continued on next page)

 
D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035 1033

Table A3 (continued)

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

As a family business the owners had created a very strong identity and ethos, which was embedded in
most of the workers. The study found LAC very effective in creating policy and ethos. Even if they still felt
they could improve their ability to pick up algedonic signals.

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

Existing resource bargaining works well in general, but the managerial variety at lower levels of
recursion is constrained by the involvement of the owners in most decisions. A more agile, frequent and
decentralised resource bargaining scheme was discussed and possibilities for implementation assessed.

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

Both the interviews and survey provided extensive and clear data on existing issues with inter-
operational management. During the workshops such issues were prioritised by participants and solutions
were jointly explored and decided upon. The prototype for a building project was designed to improve
importantly the relationships between Systems 1, 2 3 and 3*

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

Evidence of lack of clear S4 roles and weak S3-S4 processes was assessed in the initial stages;
participants and consultants had long discussions aimed at designing more appropriate S4 roles and re-
orienting the S3/S4 decision making spaces to achieve a more balanced strategy and innovation
development processes.

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and minor uncertainty (white)

The study produced strong evidence to suggest the need to improve homeostasis in the S3/S4/S5 in
particular at the level of project; there were also some suggestions to improve the balance in this homeostats
at the regional and national levels, which were originally accepted by the participants.

Excellent coverage (green) with minor uncertainty (white)

In depth analysis on operational autonomy supported the discussions at the workshops. Strong
agreements were achieved after the second workshop when deciding on experimenting with a few initial
prototypes of the more autonomous and hopefully effective building team process designed for the lowest
levels of recursive organisation.

Good coverage (green) with minor shortfalls (red) and minor uncertainty (white)

During the data analysis and the workshops some examples of algedonic signals were identified and
mechanisms to address them were also suggested.

 
1034 D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035

References

Achterbergh, J., & Vriens, D. (2002). Managing Viable Knowledge. Syst Res Behav Sci,
19(3), 223-241. doi:10.1002/sres.440.

Ackermann, F. (2012). Problem structuring methods ’in the Dock’: arguing the case
for Soft OR. Eur J Oper Res, 219(3), 652-658. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2011.11.014.

Ackermann, F., & Eden, C. (2011a). Making strategy: Mapping out strategic success
(2nd ed.). London: SAGE.

Ackermann, F., & Eden, C. (2011b). Negotiation in Strategy Making Teams: group
Support Systems and the Process of Cognitive Change. Group Decision and Nego-
tiation, 20(3), 293-314. doi:10.1007/s10726-008-9133-y.

Ackermann, F., Franco, L. A., Rouwette, E., & White, L. (2014). Problem structuring
research and practice for the next decade: looking back to go forward. EURO
Journal on Decision Processes, 2(3-4), 165-172. doi:10.1007/s40070-014-0037-6.

Ashby, W. R. (1958). Requisite variety and its implications for the control of complex
systems. Cybernetica, 1(2), 83-99.

Batista, L., Davis-Poynter, S., Ng, I, & Maull, R. (2017). Servitization through
outcome-based contract - A systems perspective from the defence industry. In-
ternational Journal of Production Economics, 192, 133-143. doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2016.
12.005.

Beer, S. (1975). Platform for change. Chichester: Wiley.

Beer, S. (1979). The heart of enterprise. Chichester: Wiley.

Beer, S. (1981). Brain of the firm (2nd ed.). Chichester: Wiley.

Beer, S. (1984). The viable system model - its provenance, development, methodol-
ogy and pathology. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 35(1), 7-25.

Beer, S. (1985). Diagnosing the system. Chichester: Wiley.

Beer, S. (1994). Beyond dispute: The invention of team syntegrity. Chichester: Wiley.

Bennett, N., & Lemoine, G. J. (2014). What VUCA really means for
you. Harvard Business Review (JAN-FEB). _ https://hbr.org/2014/01/
what-vuca-really- means-for-you.

Bititci, U. S., Carrie, A. S., & McDevitt, L. (1997). Integrated performance measure-
ment systems: a development guide. International Journal of Operations and Pro-
duction Management, 17(5), 522-534. doi:10.1108/01443579710167230.

Brocklesby, J. (2012). Using the Viable Systems Model to examine multi-agency ar-
rangements for combatting transnational organised crime. Journal of the Opera-
tional Research Society, 63(3), 418-430. doi:10.1057/jors.2011.43.

Burrell, G., & Morgan, G. (1979). Sociological paradigms and organisational analysis:
Elements of the sociology of corporate life. Ashgate.

Checkland, P. (1981). Systems thinking, systems practice. Chichester: Wiley.

Checkland, P., & Scholes, J. (1990). Soft systems methodology in action. Chichester:
Wiley.

Christopher, W. F. (2007). Holistic management: Managing what matters for company
success. Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley; Chichester: John Wiley [distributor].

Davis, J.. MacDonald, A., & White, L. (2010). Problem-structuring methods and
project management: an example of stakeholder involvement using Hierarchi-
cal Process Modelling methodology. Journal of the Operational Research Society,
61(6), 893-904. doi:10.1057/jors.2010.12.

Davis, J. P., & Hall, J. W. (2003). A software-supported process for assembling ev-
idence and handling uncertainty in decision-making. Decis Support Syst, 35(3),
415-433. doi: 10.1016/s0167-9236(02)00117-3.

Eden, C. (1995). On evaluating the performance of ’wide-band’ GDSS’s. Eur J Oper
Res, 81(2), 302-311. doi: 10.1016/0377-2217(93)E0241-0.

Edson, M., & Klein, L. (2016). Problem Structuring and Research Design in Systemic
Inquiry. In M. Edson, P. Buckle Henning, & S. Sankaran (Eds.), A Guide to Systems
Research: Philosophy, Process and Practice (pp. 59-80) Eds. Singapore: Springer.

Espejo, R., Bowling, D., & Hoverstadt, P. (1999). The viable system model
and the Viplan_ software. Kybernetes, 28(6-7), 661-678. doi:10.1108/
03684929910282944.

Espejo, R., & Reyes, A. (2011). Organizational Systems: Managing Complexity with the
Viable System Model. Heidelberg: Springer.

Espinosa, A., Cardoso, P. P., Arcaute, E., & Christensen, K. (2011). Complexity ap-
proaches to self-organisation: a case study from an Irish eco-village. Kybernetes,
40(3), 536-558. doi:10.1108/03684921111133737.

Espinosa, A., & Duque, C. (2018). Complexity management and multi-scale gover-
nance: a case study in an Amazonian indigenous association. Eur J Oper Res,
268(3), 1006-1020. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2017.07.049.

Espinosa, A., Harnden, R., & Walker, J. (2008). A complexity approach to sustainabil-
ity - Stafford Beer revisited. Eur J Oper Res, 187(2), 636-651. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.
2007.03.023.

Espinosa, A., & Porter, T. (2011). Sustainability, complexity and learning: insights
from complex systems approaches. Learning Organization, 18(1), 54-72. doi:10.
1108/09696471111096000.

Espinosa, A., Reficco, E., Martinez, A., & Guzman, D. (2015). A methodology for sup-
porting strategy implementation based on the VSM: a case study in a Latin-
American multi-national. Eur J Oper Res, 240(1), 202-212. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2014.
06.014.

Espinosa, A., & Walker, J. (2013). Complexity management in practice: a Viable Sys-
tem Model intervention in an Irish eco-community. Eur J Oper Res, 225(1), 118-
129. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2012.09.015.

Espinosa, A., & Walker, J. (2017). A Complexity Approach to Sustainability: Theory and
Application. London: World Scientific Press.

Fletcher, A., & Davis, J. (2003). Dialectical evidence assembly for discovery. In
G. Grieser, Y. Tanaka, & A. Yamamoto (Eds.), Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Discovery Science (DS 2003) (LNCS 2843, pp. 100-113) Eds.. Sap-
poro, Japan: Springer.

Flood, R. L., & Jackson, M. C. (1991). Creative problem solving: Total systems interven-
tion. John Wiley and Sons.

Franco, A. (2013). Rethinking Soft OR interventions: models as boundary objects. Eur
J Oper Res, 231(3), 720-733. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2013.06.033.

Franco, L. A., & Montibeller, G. (2010). Facilitated modelling in operational research.
Eur J Oper Res, 205(3), 489-500. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2009.09.030.

Garfinkel, H. (1996). Ethnomethodology’s Program. Soc Psychol Q, 59(1), 5-21. doi: 10.
2307/2787116.

Hall, J. W., Blockley, D. I., & Davis, J. P. (1998). Uncertain inference using interval
probability theory. International Journal of Approximate Reasoning, 19(3-4), 247-
264. doi: 10.1016/SO888-613X(98)10010-5.

Hart, D., & Paucar-Caceres, A. (2017). A utilisation focussed and viable systems ap-
proach for evaluating technology supported learning. Eur J Oper Res, 259(2),
626-641. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2016.10.056.

Harwood, S. A. (2012). The management of change and the Viplan Methodology in
practice. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 63(6), 748-761. doi:10.1057/
jors.2011.73.

Harwood, S. A. (2018). In search of a (WEF) nexus approach. Environmental Science
and Policy, 83, 79-85. doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2018.01.020.

Harwood, S. A. (2019). A question of interpretation: the Viable System Model (VSM).
Eur J Oper Res, 274, 1198-1201. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2018.10.054.

Howick, S., & Ackermann, F. (2011). Mixing OR methods in practice: past, present
and future directions. Eur J Oper Res, 215(3), 503-511. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2011.03.
013.

Jackson, M. C. (1988). An appreciation of stafford beer’s ‘viable system’ viewpoint
on managerial practice. Journal of Management Studies, 25(6), 557-573. doi:10.
1111/j.1467-6486.1988.tb00047.x.

Jackson, M. C. (1992). The soul of the viable system model. Systems Practice, 5(5),
561-564. doi: 10.1007/BF01140507.

Jackson, M. C. (1993). The System of Systems Methodologies - A Guide to Re-
searchers. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 44(2), 208-209. doi:10.
1057/jors.1993.42.

Jackson, M. C. (2001). Critical systems thinking and practice. Eur J Oper Res, 128(2),
233-244. doi:10.1016/s0377-2217(00)00067-9.

Jackson, M. C. (2003). Systems thinking: Creative holism for managers. Chichester:
John Wiley.

Jackson, M. C. (2006). Beyond problem structuring methods: reinventing the future
of OR/MS. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 57(7), 868-878. doi:10.
1057/palgrave.jors.2602093.

Jackson, M. C. (2019). Critical Systems Thinking and the Management of Complexity.
Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.

Jackson, M. C., & Keys, P. (1984). Towards a System of Systems Methodologies. Jour-
nal of the Operational Research Society, 35(6), 473-486. doi: 10.1057/jors.1984.101.

Lane, D. C. (1994). With a Little Help from Our Friends - How System Dynamics and
Soft OR Can Learn from Each Other. Syst Dyn Rev, 10(2-3), 101-134.

Leydesdorff, L., & Nerghes, A. (2017). Co-word maps and topic modeling: a compar-
ison using small and medium-sized corpora (N < 1,000). J Assoc Inf Sci Technol,
68(4), 1024-1035. doi:10.1002/asi.23740.

Lowe, D., Martingale, L., & Yearworth, M. (2016). Guiding interventions in a multi-
organisational context: combining the Viable System Model and Hierarchical
Process Modelling for use as a Problem Structuring Method. Journal of the Oper-
ational Research Society, 67(12), 1481-1495. doi:10.1057/jors.2016.6.

Marashi, E., & Davis, J. P. (2006). An argumentation-based method for managing
complex issues in design of infrastructural systems. Reliability Engineering & Sys-
tem Safety, 91(12), 1535-1545. doi:10.1016/j.ress.2006.01.013.

Marashi, S. E. (2006). Managing Discourse and Uncertainty for Decision-making in Civil
and Infrastructure Engineering Systems. University of Bristol (PhD).

Marashi, S. E., Davis, J. P., & Hall, J. W. (2008). Combination methods and conflict
handling in evidential theories. International Journal of Uncertainty Fuzziness and
Knowledge-Based Systems, 16(3), 337-369. doi:10.1142/s0218488508005315.

Maturana, H. R. (1975). The organization of the living: a theory of the living organi-
zation. Int J Man Mach Stud, 7(3), 313-332. doi: 10.1016/SO020-7373(75)80015-0.

McCulloch, W. S. (1965). Embodiments of mind. Camb.: MIT Press.

Mingers, J. (2000). Variety is the spice of life: combining soft and hard OR/MS
methods. International Transactions in Operational Research, 7(6), 673-691.
doi:10.1111/j.1475-3995.2000.tb00224.x.

Mingers, J. (2001). Multimethodology- Mixing and Matching Methods. In J. Rosen-
head, & J. Mingers (Eds.), Rational Analysis for Problematic World Revisited. Chich-
ester: Wiley.

Mingers, J. (2003). A classification of the philosophical assumptions of manage-
ment science methods. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 54(6), 559-
570. doi:10.1057/palgrave.jors.2601436.

Mingers, J., & Brocklesby, J. (1997). Multimethodology: towards a framework
for mixing methodologies. Omega-International Journal of Management Science,
25(5), 489-509. doi: 10.1016/s0305-0483(97)00018-2.

Mingers, J., & Gill, A. (1997). Multimethodology: The theory and practice of integrating
management science methodologies. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.

Naughton, J. (1977). The Checkland Methodology: A Reader’s Guide. Milton Keynes:
Open University.

Ormerod, R., & Pidd, M. (2006). The OR/MS contribution to strategy development
and policy-making. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 57(1), 117-120.
doi:10.1057/palgrave.jors.2602063.

Ormerod, R. J. (2008). The transformation competence perspective. Journal of the Op-
erational Research Society, 59(11), 1435-1448. doi:10.1057/palgrave.jors.2602482.

Ormerod, R. J. (2014). The mangle of OR practice: towards more informative case
D. Lowe, A. Espinosa and M. Yearworth/ European Journal of Operational Research 287 (2020) 1014-1035 1035

studies of ’technical’ projects. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 65(8),
1245-1260. doi:10.1057/jors.2013.78.

Pickering, A. (1993). The mangle of practice - agency and emergence in the so-
ciology of science. American Journal of Sociology, 99(3), 559-589. doi:10.1086/
230316.

Pickering, A. (1995). The mangle of practice: Time, agency, and science. ChicagoLon-
don: University of Chicago Press.

Pollack, J. (2009). Multimethodology in series and parallel: strategic planning us-
ing hard and soft OR. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 60(2), 156-167.
doi:10.1057/palgrave.jors.2602538.

Preece, G., Shaw, D., & Hayashi, H. (2013). Using the Viable System Model (VSM)
to structure information processing complexity in disaster response. Eur J Oper
Res, 224(1), 209-218. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2012.06.032.

Preece, G., Shaw, D., & Hayashi, H. (2015). Application of the Viable System Model to
analyse communications structures: a case study of disaster response in Japan.
Eur J Oper Res, 243(1), 312-322. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2014.11.026.

Rittel, H. W. J., & Webber, M. M. (1973). Dilemmas in a general theory of planning.
Policy Sci, 4(2), 155-169. doi:10.1007/BF01405730.

Robey, D., & Markus, M. L. (1998). Beyond Rigor and Relevance: producing Consum-
able Research about Information Systems. Information Resources Management
Journal, 11(1), 7-16. doi:10.4018/irmj.1998010101.

Schwaninger, M. (1990). Embodiments of organizational fitness: the Viable Sys-
tem Model (VSM) as a guide. Systems Practice, 3(3), 249-264. doi:10.1007/
BF01062731.

Schwaninger, M. (2006). Intelligent organizations: Powerful models for systemic man-
agement. Berlin; London: Springer.

Schwaninger, M., & Pérez Rios, J. (2008). System dynamics and cybernetics: a syn-
ergetic pair. Syst Dyn Rev, 24(2), 145-174. doi:10.1002/sdr.400.

Schwaninger, M., & Scheef, C. (2016). A Test of the Viable System Model: theo-
retical Claim vs. Empirical Evidence. Cybern Syst, 47(7), 544-569. doi:10.1080/
01969722.2016.1209375.

Searle, J. R. (1995). The construction of social reality. London: Allen Lane.

Searle, J. R. (2006). Social ontology: some basic principles. Anthropological Theory,
6(1), 12-29. doi:10.1177/1463499606061731.

Smith, C. M., & Shaw, D. (2019). The characteristics of problem structuring methods:
a literature review. Eur J Oper Res, 274(2), 403-416. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2018.05.
003.

Tavella, E., & Papadopoulos, T. (2015). Expert and novice facilitated modelling: a case
of a Viable System Model workshop in a local food network. Journal of the Op-
erational Research Society, 66(2), 247-264. doi:10.1057/jors.2013.187.

Tavella, E., & Papadopoulos, T. (2017). Applying OR to problem situations within
community organisations: a case in a Danish non-profit, member-driven food
cooperative. Eur J Oper Res, 258(2), 726-742. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2016.08.065.

Tully, P., White, L., & Yearworth, M. (2019). The Value Paradox of Problem Struc-
turing Methods. Systems Research and Behavioral Science, 36(4), 424-444. doi: 10.
1002/sres.2557.

Ulrich, W. (1981). A critique of pure cybernetic reason: the Chilean experience with
cybernetics. Journal of Applied Systems Analysis, 8(1), 33-59.

White, L., & Taket, A. (1996). The end of theory? Omega-International Journal of Man-
agement Science, 24(1), 47-56. doi: 10.1016/0305-0483(95)00048-8.

White, L., Yearworth, M., & Burger, K. (2015). Understanding PSM interventions
through sense-making and the mangle of practice lens, 15th International Con-
ference on Group Decision and Negotiation (GDN 2015). Vol. 218. Lecture Notes in
Business Information Processing (Vol. 218, pp. 13-27). Warsaw, Poland: Springer.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-19515-5_2.

Yearworth, M., Lowe, D. A., Schien, D., & Walworth, T. (2015). From deciding to act-
ing: Hierarchical process modelling for problem structuring. In Paper presented
at the Calculating and Communicating Uncertainty (CCU2015).

Yearworth, M., & White, L. (2014). The non-codified use of problem structuring
methods and the need for a generic constitutive definition. Eur J Oper Res,
237(3), 932-945. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2014.02.015.

Yolles, M. (2001). Viable boundary critique. Journal of the Operational Research Soci-
ety, 52(1), 35-47. doi: 10.1057/palgrave.jors.2600069.
