Np} | Digital Medicine

ARTICLE OPEN

www.nature.com/npjdigitalmed

mHealth and wearable technology should replace motor
diaries to track motor fluctuations in Parkinson’s disease

M. Kelley Erb@"*, Daniel R. Karlin'*, Bryan K. Ho®, Kevin C. Thomas’, Federico Parisi”®, Gloria P. Vergara-Diaz’, Jean-Francois Daneault”,
Paul W. Wacnik', Hao Zhang', Tairmae Kangarloo', Charmaine Demanuele', Chris R. Brooks’, Craig N. Detheridge’,

Nina Shaafi Kabiri@*, Jaspreet S. Bhangu* and Paolo Bonato”®

Accurately monitoring motor and non-motor symptoms as well as complications in people with Parkinson's disease (PD) is a major
challenge, both during clinical management and when conducting clinical trials investigating new treatments. A variety of
strategies have been relied upon including questionnaires, motor diaries, and the serial administration of structured clinical exams
like part Ill of the MDS-UPDRS. To evaluate the potential use of mobile and wearable technologies in clinical trials of new
pharmacotherapies targeting PD symptoms, we carried out a project (project BlueSky) encompassing four clinical studies, in which
60 healthy volunteers (aged 23-69; 33 females) and 95 people with PD (aged 42-80; 37 females; years since diagnosis 1-24 years;
Hoehn and Yahr 1-3) participated and were monitored in either a laboratory environment, a simulated apartment, or at home and
in the community. In this paper, we investigated (i) the utility and reliability of self-reports for describing motor fluctuations; (ii) the
agreement between participants and clinical raters on the presence of motor complications; (iii) the ability of video raters to
accurately assess motor symptoms, and (iv) the dynamics of tremor, dyskinesia, and bradykinesia as they evolve over the
medication cycle. Future papers will explore methods for estimating symptom severity based on sensor data. We found that 38% of
participants who were asked to complete an electronic motor diary at home missed ~25% of total possible entries and otherwise
made entries with an average delay of >4 h. During clinical evaluations by PD specialists, self-reports of dyskinesia were marked by
~35% false negatives and 15% false positives. Compared with live evaluation, the video evaluation of part Ill of the MDS-UPDRS
significantly underestimated the subtle features of tremor and extremity bradykinesia, suggesting that these aspects of the disease
may be underappreciated during remote assessments. On the other hand, live and video raters agreed on aspects of postural
instability and gait. Our results highlight the significant opportunity for objective, high-resolution, continuous monitoring afforded

by wearable technology to improve upon the monitoring of PD symptoms.
npj Digital Medicine (2020)3:6; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-019-0214-x

INTRODUCTION

Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a slowly progressing neurodegenera-
tive disorder with a lifetime risk of ~2% for men and 1.3% for
women over the age of 40.' It is the second most common
neurodegenerative disorder behind Alzheimer’s disease. While the
specific etiology of PD remains unclear, it is generally recognized
as a degenerative disease involving the basal ganglia and its
projections. The underlying pathology indicates a loss of
dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra as well as neuronal
loss in the locus coeruleus and the raphe nuclei. The major
clinical diagnostic features of PD include bradykinesia, rest tremor,
rigidity of skeletal muscles, impairment of postural reflexes, and
gait disturbance. Additional symptoms of PD include a large
number of non-motor phenomena, including olfactory dysfunc-
tion, psychiatric symptoms, sleep disorders, and autonomic
dysfunction.*

The current clinical management of the disease remains
symptomatic with motor symptoms of PD responsive to levodopa
treatment early in the disease. Such responsiveness is a key
confirmatory diagnostic criterion of idiopathic PD. However,
within 3-5 years of beginning treatment with levodopa, ~50%
of people with PD begin to experience complications that include

motor and non-motor fluctuations, dyskinesia, and psychosis.**
The pulsatile nature of levodopa delivery provided by orally
administered formulations in combination with the progressive
denervation of the striatum and effects of PD on other neural
structures are likely to blame.°® With a variety of treatment
Strategies available and in development to manage complications,
reliable and precise monitoring tools are needed both in clinical
practice and in clinical trials investigating new treatments.

Questionnaires’ and motor diaries®? remain the primary tools
used to identify and monitor motor and non-motor fluctuations.
Concerns about the accuracy and reliability of motor diaries are
well-appreciated,'°'' including the risk of fatigue that may lead to
poor adherence by participants, the effects of recall bias,'° the
limited time resolution they afford, and the nature of the data
which measures only the duration of time spent in an identified
state and not the severity of impairment (or magnitude of
improvement) experienced by individuals with PD in response to
treatment.

An alternative to the use of diaries is the serial administration of
structured clinical exams, including part Ill of the Movement
Disorder Society Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDS-
UPDRS part Ill), throughout one or several consecutive medication

 

‘Early Clinical Development, Pfizer, Inc, Cambridge, MA, USA. *Department of Psychiatry, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. *Department of Neurology, Tufts
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. “Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. °>Department of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical School, Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA. °Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard

University, Boston, MA, USA. *email: kelley.erb@gmail.com

Scripps Research Translational Institute

np} nature partner

journals
Np)

M.K. Erb et al.

 

cycles, as a means to enable a quantitative assessment of the
severity of motor fluctuations. ' Ideally, this would be done for the
duration of a full day. However, the burden to individuals with PD
and clinical raters of a full day of live examination involving the
Same provocative maneuvers repeated many times makes this
approach impractical for large scale clinical trials or routine
assessments performed in clinical practice.

It may be possible to overcome, at least in part, these limitations
by relying on standardized video recordings of the same
assessments, for example in the context of a telemedicine
visit.'*-'? However, even when excluding symptoms and man-
euvers that cannot be evaluated by video (e.g., evaluations of
rigidity or tests of retropulsion), it is not clear to what extent video
recordings obscure subtle changes in symptom severity that one
can observe in person.

Digital measurement tools including mobile and wearable
technologies have been widely recognized as promising for
improving upon the remote monitoring of people with PD.'®'”
The ability of these technologies to make remote, high-resolution,
high-frequency observations of ambulation, upper- and lower-
extremity movements, and to collect the physiological data (e.g.,
electromyographic—EMG—and electrocardiographic—ECG data)
has been broadly acknowledged.'* 7°

To evaluate the potential use of mobile and wearable
technologies in clinical trials of new pharmacotherapies targeting
PD symptoms, we carried out a project encompassing four studies
that investigated potential strategies for monitoring motor and
non-motor fluctuations of PD symptoms and complications. We
studied changes in motor fluctuators as they followed their own
individual levodopa dosing schedule as a model to enable the
development of analytical methods for the analysis of sensor data
and study their sensitivity to treatment effects on motor states

*BioStampRC, MC10 Inc. _ Study 1
3-Axis Accel, 31.25 & 250 Hz Pfizer & IBM
3-Axis Gyro, 250 Hz
EMG, 250 Hz
ECG, 250 Hz

Study 2
Tufts Medical
Center

Opal, APDM Inc.
3-Axis Accel, 250 Hz
3-Axis Gyro, 250 Hz
3-Axis Mag, 250 Hz

Study 3
Spaulding

GENEActiv Original, Activinsights Rehabilitation
3-Axis Accel, 100 Hz Hospital
Temperature, 100 Hz
Ambient Light, 100 Hz

*Shimmer3, Shimmer Sensing Study 4
GSR, 8 Hz Boston University
ECG, 256 Hz

School of Medicine

 

*Recording parameters depended on placement location

(Fig. 1). In studies 1, 2, and 3, multiple administrations of the
MDS-UPDRS part Ill, scripted activities of daily living (SADL’s), and
speech tasks were performed. For participants with PD, sessions
were timed to take place around PD participants’ regularly
scheduled dose of levodopa, and we obtained both a live rating
and three video ratings (from separate raters) of the MDS-UPDRS
part Ill for each session. In addition, participants with PD self-
reported their motor state multiple times throughout the
laboratory sessions. Video raters were blinded to when the
participant had taken their medications. In study 4, participants
with PD completed 2 weeks of at-home monitoring with the
ultimate goal of investigating the relationship between contin-
uous estimates of motor state derived from wearable sensor data,
participants’ self-report of their motor state, and the timing of
levodopa intake.

While pitfalls and shortcomings of existing instruments for
quantifying motor function and motor fluctuations are often
used as a justification for research aimed at developing
technology-based tools for PD, several investigators have
offered direct evidence. Goetz et al. investigated the agreement
between PD patients’ self-assessment of their motor state and
blinded video raters in the context a remotely administered
UPDRS, and observed only 64% concordance.*' Similarly, Stacy
et al. observed significant disagreement between patients and
clinicans on the presence of wearing-off phenonmena.’ In this
paper, we further discuss the utility and reliability of self-reports
for describing motor fluctuations based on our data set. We also
discuss the agreement between participants and clinical raters
on the presence of motor complications, and the dynamics of
tremor, dyskinesia, and bradykinesia as they evolve over the
medication cycle. Other analyses will be the focus of future
papers.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Session 1 Session 2 60 Healthy Volunteers

Day 1 Same Day or up to Day 14 Test-Retest Design

~45 Min ~45 Min * 2 Sessions

Speech |} MDSUPDRS-3 Speech [ MDSUPDRS-3 }} sADLs * Lab
1 Participant’s Regularly Scheduled Levodopa
“Off” Session “On” Session 35 People with PD
Day 1 Same Day or up to Day 14 +/- Levodopa
~45 Min ~45 Min * 2 Sessions

(randomized per participant)
* Clinical Research Center

 

 

[Speech MDSUPDRS-3 || sADLs MDSUPDRS-3 || sADLs

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ua

Motor State Assessments every 15 minutes
until participant confirms they are “on”

Assess Motor State

1 Participant’s Regularly Scheduled Levodopa

Controlled Laboratory Environment Simulated Apartment Setting 26 People with PD
Session Session Session Session Session Session Full Medication Cycle
1 2* 3 4* 5 6 we
Day 1 Day 2 or up to Day 14 * 1st visit: Lab
~6 Hours ~5 Hours ¢ 2nd visit: Simulated Apt

Battery 1 Battery 2 Battery 1 Battery 2 Battery 1 “semi-scripted” ADLs protocol

CPP Pee aa a
WN

 

Battery 1 Battery 2 Every 30 minutes, visit 1 MDSUPDRS-3, _ End of each hour, visit 2:
+ Speech Sample + MDSUPDRS-3 * 3min rest Live . Motor State Self Report
+ MDSUPDRS-3 * 15 seconds (iPad App)
+ sADLs pronation/supination, . Shortened MDSUPDRS-3
left & right arms (by teleconference)
Lab At-Home / Community Lab Lab At-Home / Community Lab 34 People with PD

Session Session Session Session Session Session At-home / In Community

* 4Lab Visits

Day 1 2/3/4/5/6|7 8 Day 29 30 | 31 | 32 | 35 | 36 | 37 38 - 2Weeks

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

~45 Min >6 Days ~45 Min ~45 Min >6 Days ~45 Min Home Monitoring
Battery 3 Motor Diaries iTUG iTUG ] Motor Diaries Battery 3
Battery 3 At Home Assessments
+ MDSUPDRS, . Veteran’s Administration (VA) Paper Motor Diary
Full . iPhone App: VA Motor Diary, Medication Log, and Symptom Tracker

* iTUG
+ PDQ-8
* EQ-5D
1

Fig.1 Devices and study designs. a Wearable devices and recording parameters that were utilized throughout the project. b In studies 1, 2,
and 3, multiple administrations of the MDS-UPDRS part Ill, scripted activities of daily living (sADL’s), and speech tasks were performed. For
participants with PD, sessions were timed to take place around PD participants’ regularly scheduled dose of levodopa, and we obtained both a
live rating and three video ratings (from separate raters) of the MDS-UPDRS part Ill for each session. In addition, participants with PD self-
reported their motor state multiple times throughout the laboratory sessions. Video raters were blinded to when the participant had taken
their medications. In study 4, participants with PD completed 2 weeks of at-home monitoring with the ultimate goal of investigating the
relationship between continuous estimates of motor state derived from wearable sensor data, participants’ self-report of their motor state,
and the timing of levodopa. BioStampRC image used with permission from MC10. GENEActiv original image used with permission from

Activinsights.

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 6

Scripps Research Translational Institute
RESULTS

Demographic and clinical characteristics of the sample
Recruitment for the first study began in July of 2016 and the last
subject for the final PD study completed the last visit in April of
2018. For the first study, we recruited healthy volunteers by
drawing from the local community in Andover, MA and Yorktown
Heights, NY, respectively (Table 1). Sixty healthy volunteers with a
mean age of 44 years (23-69 age range) were enrolled, and 33
were female. Compared with PD participants, healthy volunteers
were significantly younger (X* = 85.18, p< 0.000, df=1), had a
higher level of education (X?= 15.22, p< 0.00, df =2) and were
more evenly balanced with regard to gender (X? = 4.21, p = 0.04,
df = 1, Table 1).

Table 1. Participant characteristics.

M.K. Erb et al.

 

Ninety-five people with PD were enrolled across the latter
3 studies, and had a mean age of 66 years (42-80 age range), 35
of whom were female. The demographic characteristics of PD
participants were virtually identical across studies 2, 3, and 4.
While participants recruited to the 2nd study appeared to be
slightly older than those recruited to the 3rd and 4th studies
(68.3+8.03 years versus 63.3+9.53 and 64.1+6.47, respec-
tively), a Kruskal-Wallis test did not reveal significant differ-
ences among these groups (X*=5.31, p=0.07, df=2).
Likewise, a chi-squared test did not reveal significant differ-
ences among the samples recruited according to gender (X? =
2.45, p=0.23, df = 2), or completed education (X* = 3.52, p=
0.48, df = 4).

Healthy volunteers

People with Parkinson's disease

Number of study participants
Age (years)

Height (cm)

Weight (Ibs)

Ethnicity—male, female, all (N)
Hispanic

Non-Hispanic

Unknown

Race—male, female, all (N)
American Indian/Alaska native
Asian

Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander
Black/African American
White/Caucasian

Other

>1 race

Unknown

Handedness (%)

Left

Right

Highest Education (%)

High school

College

Postgraduate

First symptom (Yrs)

First diagnosis (Yrs)

MOCA

MMSE

Current medications
Levodopa (%)

Agonist (%)

MAO-B inhibitor (%)
Anticholinergic (%)

COMT inhibitor (%)

Hoehn and Yahr (%)

Study #1

60

44.1 + 10.70 (23-69)
171.6 + 16.4 (67-194)
167 + 38.0 (101-266)

5 (8.3)
55 (91.7)

O (0)
14 (23.3)
46 (76.7)

Scripps Research Translational Institute

Study #2

35

68.3 + 8.0 (46-79)
171.6 + 16.4 (147-189)
181.4 + 41.8 (96-248)

N

0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0

6 (17.1)
29 (82.9)

6 (17.1)

11 (31.4)

18 (51.4)

59.5 + 8.0 (42-75)
62.5 + 8.2 (44-76)
26.0 + 3.7 (14-30)

Study #3

26

66.1 + 8.2 (42-80)
175.4 + 10.3 (152-196)
182.7 + 34.9 (116-260)

ON OF F - OO Oo
OV
So Oo ON CO OO CO

3 (11.5)
23 (88.5)

4 (15.4)

13 (50.0)

9 (34.6)

53.3 + 10.6 (31-76)
54.8 + 10.4 (32-76)
27.2 + 2.5 (21-30)

26 (100)
13 (50)
9 (35)

1 (4)

7 (27)

0 (0)
22 (85)
4 (15)

Study #4

34

66.1 + 8.2 (42-80)

171.6 +9.8 (155 - 201)
167.1 + 27.5 (120 - 230)

oOo oOo0UrPlUCOUCOCUCOUCUCOO
oOo OoO0UlUwPrlUlUCOUCOUOCUCUCOUOUCUCUCOO

5 (14.7)
29 (85.3)

4 (11.8)
10 (29.4)
20 (58.8)

28.8 + 1.2 (26-30)

 

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 6
M.K. Erb et al.

 

Device data

Over 11,000 h of continuous data were recorded from between 7
and 16 simultaneously worn devices (Supplementary Fig. 1) across
the four studies. For recordings made in the context of the
laboratory and clinic visits, devices were positioned on the torso,
lower back, forearms, wrists, thighs, ankles, and feet, and
contained combinations of accelerometers, gyroscopes, magnet-
ometers, barometers, and bio-potential devices recording electro-
cardiogram (ECG), electromyography (EMG), or galvanic skin
response (GSR), depending on the study. In study 4, for recordings
made at home, people with PD wore devices on both wrists, the
torso, most-affected thigh, and both feet. We utilized devices both
with strap-mounted form factors (APDM; Activinsights) and
adhesive-backed patch-worn form factors (MC10), and combina-
tion of the two (Shimmer). All in-clinic sessions were monitored
with multiple video cameras and microphones to enable off-line
assessment of motor status and to collect speech data.

Diary performance and self-report

In study 4 (NCT03247387), we asked all (n = 34) participants to
simultaneously complete an electronic (eDiary) version of the
Veterans Affairs Patient Motor Diary (VA Patient Motor Diary).77
Possible diary entries included: “On”, “On with Troublesome
Dyskinesia”, “Off’, and “Asleep”, reported at 30-min intervals,
where participants back-filled “Asleep” entries upon waking each
morning. With 3 days of monitoring per week for 2 separate weeks
(6 total days of monitoring) and 48 possible entries per day, 288
entries were possible for each participant. The electronic diary
allowed us to investigate adherence to eDiary completion by
logging each time participants interacted with the application for
an initial entry and to subsequently modify an entry.

We observed distinct, varying rates of adherence completing
the electronic diary, which we investigated by considering the
mean number of missed entries and the mean latency to response
(Fig. 2). By visual inspection of the data (Supplementary Fig. 2), we
identified distinct adherence patterns: (1) adherent participants
(n= 18) rarely missed entries (24.4+ 24.4 missed) and had low
latency to response (59.4 + 38.6 min), (2) non-adherent partici-
pants (n = 15) missed entries more often (70.8 + 43.5 missed) and
took longer to complete those they did not miss (253.0+
85.5 min). Of note, two individuals were particularly non-
adherent. We chose to highlight them as they represent unique
challenges to researchers employing motor diaries. In one case, a
participant missed a similar number of entries to others who were
non-adherent (89), but appeared to complete large-numbers of
them in a single “batch”, resulting in a high mean latency
(884.0 min). Another individual missed the large majority of entries
(281 missed) with those few entries completed having a mean
latency of 144.2 min. Such late-batch participants and highly non-
adherent participants are often the subject of anecdotes by
clinical researchers employing motor diaries. In the context of
Studies utilizing paper versions, it may be possible to avoid
contaminating study results by excluding data from non-adherent
participants (those who fail to complete the diary) from analysis.
However, because it is impossible to know when paper diaries are
completed, the results obtained from late-batch completers are
indistinguishable from those other participants and may reduce
the accuracy of the results.

We further investigated the agreement between participants and
clinical raters in studies 2 and 3 throughout the in-lab data
collection protocol during each visit. Participants reported their
motor state at a variety of time points throughout each session,
including prior to and after each administration of the MDS-UPDRS
part Ill. As part of the motor assessment, clinical raters reported
whether dyskinesias were present during the exam. In total, 34.8%
of the times participants reported being in the “on” state (without
dyskinesia), clinical raters indicated that dyskinesias were present.

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 6

 

Conversely, in 16.7% of the assessments that participants reported
being in the “on with dyskinesia” state, clinical raters indicated that
dyskinesias were not present (Table 2).

MDS-UPDRS part Ill scores

Given the above observation that self-reports of motor symptoms
may not be reliable and continuous, in-person, visual assessment
is not practical, we assessed the agreement of the clinical scores
(MDS-UPDRS part Ill) generated by live raters or raters using video
recordings. We pooled scores from live raters and video raters
across all participants, all sessions, and all three studies of patients
with PD and fit a mixed effects model with relevant demographic,
clinical, and experimental variables (see the Statistical methods
section for more detail). Because evaluating rigidity requires a
physical interaction between examiner and participant and this
would not be possible with by remote assessment, we excluded
these scores from the analysis. All other subscale scores were
included. Significant main effects of Time Since Last Levodopa
(X? = 24.77, p < 0.0001), Hoehn & Yahr stage (X* = 40.23, p < 0.0001),

 

300 - i = 900
Mii Missed entries +
Mii Mean Latency

 

 

 

200} 4 600

Missed Entries, # (mean + S.D.)
Latency, min (mean + S.D.)

 

 

 

Adherent Non-Adherent

Fig. 2 Adherence to motor diaries. All 34 participants in the 4th
study were asked to complete an electronic motor diary during the
first 3 days of each week of at-home monitoring. One participant's
data were lost due to technical failure of their phone. Among the
remaining 33 participants, adherent participants (n= 18) rarely
missed entries (24.4 + 24.4 missed) and had low latency to response
(59.4 + 38.6 min), whereas non-adherent participants (n = 15) missed
entries more often (70.8 + 43.5 missed) and took longer to complete
those they did not miss (253.0 + 85.5 min). Data are shown as the
mean value, plus, or minus the standard deviation for each
measurement.

Table 2. Agreement between participants and clinical raters on the
presence of dyskinesia.

Individuals with PD self-reports

ON ON with Dyskinesia

 

PD specialists presence dyskinesia
Yes 34.8%
No 65.2%

83.3%
16.7%

Per the instructions of part III of the MDS-UPDRS in studies 2 and 3, clinical
raters reported whether dyskinesias were present during each assessment.
The study protocol also asked participants to provide self-report of their
motor state both before and after the same assessments. We found that
34.8% of the time, participants reported being “on” (without dyskinesia)
even though clinical raters indicated that dyskinesias were present during
the exam. Conversely, in 16.7% of the assessments that participants
reported being in the “on with dyskinesia” state, clinical raters indicated
that dyskinesias were not present

Scripps Research Translational Institute
Total Part Ill Score

(excluding rigidity) Subscale
40 24
38 ¥
rs |
36 *
wi 22
wo 34 T
+l
2 32 e
°
oO
” 30 ‘ 20 -
”
c
&S 28
=
”
YW 26
18
24 e
22 |
20 16
Live Video Live Video

 

Bradykinesia

M.K. Erb et al.
Tremor PIGD
Subscale Subscale
10 10
*
8 8
6 6
:
4 4
2 2
Live Video Live Video

Fig. 3 MDS-UPDRS Part Ill scores, by subscale. The protocol for studies 2, 3, and 4 each included multiple administrations of part Ill of the
MDS-UPDRS. We pooled scores from live raters and video raters across all participants, all sessions, and all three studies of people with PD
(N = 754 scores) and fit a mixed effects model with relevant demographic, clinical, and experimental variables. When applying this model to
the total score (excluding rigidity items), significant main effects of rating context (whether the rating had been performed live or by video)
were observed where the video ratings underestimated the score. Post hoc least squares means estimates of the total MDS-UPDRS part Ill
score from video raters was significantly lower than that from live raters by 4.64 + 0.64 points (left plot, t= 7.3, p< 0.0001) averaged across
session condition and gender. The right three plots show the result of fitting subscale scores for tremor, bradykinesia, and PIGD for the same
data set (VN = 754) using the same mixed model. Post hoc least squares means estimates of the bradykinesia and tremor subscales from video
raters were significantly lower than those of live raters (by 3.35+0.45 points, t= 7.5, p< 0.0001, and 2.18+0.23 points (t= 7.5, p< 0.0001,
respectively). Post hoc least squares means estimates for PIGD from video raters, however, were not significantly different than those from live

raters (—0.0878 + 0.13 points, t= —0.675, p = 0.5002).

and Rating Context i.e., live versus video rated, (X* = 53.69, p<
0.001) were observed. No significant main effects were observed
for gender (X? = 0.04, p = 0.85), years since diagnosis (X” = 0.00, p
= 1.00), or session condition (X* = 4.92, p = 0.18).

Post hoc least squares means estimates of the Total MDS-
UPDRS part Ill score from video raters was significantly lower than
that from live raters by 4.64+0.64 points (t= 7.3, p< 0.0001)
averaged across session condition and gender (Fig. 3). We
explored this discrepancy between live and video raters further
by fitting linear mixed effects models for component subscales of
the MDS-UPDRS part Ill for bradykinesia (sum of scores from items
3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7, 3.8, 3.14) tremor (sum of scores from items 3.15,
3.16, 3.17, 3.18), and postural instability and gait disorder (PIGD)
(sum of scores from items 3.9, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13). As with
models for the total score, models for tremor and bradykinesia
subscale scores revealed significant effects of Rating Context,
whereas the model for PIGD did not. These results suggest that
while it may be possible to appreciate impairments affecting gait
and posture by examining video recordings, subtle differences in
the severity of upper- and lower-extremity bradykinesia and
tremor are difficult to rate by examining video recordings and
prone to underestimation when compared with live ratings.

All raters in each study were MDS-UPDRS certified. The video
raters were different individuals than the live raters and were
blinded to the medication status of participants. To rule out the
possibility that the different ratings provided by live vs. video
raters could be attributed to inter-rater differences, we asked live
raters to generate clinical scores by inspecting randomly selected
video recordings of the same assessments they had previously
performed live. This was accomplished ~10 months after the last
subject had completed the study. A paired-samples t test
revealed significantly lower video scores compared with the live
ratings (mean of the differences = —2.96, t= —2.156, df = 24,
p =0.02; Supplementary Fig. 3). This observation indicates that
their underestimation of tremor and bradykinesia severity was
due to difficulties appreciating subtle movement abnormalities
through video.

Scripps Research Translational Institute

Dynamics of motor symptoms

Although different time intervals have been utilized for self-
reports of motor states,'' motor diaries—including the VA motor
diary used in study 4 of this work—often recommend that entries
be made every 30 min.®” Accordingly, we investigated whether
collecting data at 30-min intervals is sufficient to capture changes
in tremor, dyskinesia, and bradykinesia severity in the participants
of study 3. During the laboratory portions of the study,
participants performed a battery of scripted tasks that included
ADL’s as well as bouts of 15s of alternating hand movements
(Supplementary Table 1). During each of these scripted tasks,
performed multiple times throughout the medication cycle, we
obtained live clinical ratings of tremor, dyskinesia, and bradyki-
nesia for each extremity.

To investigate how frequently changes in the severity of motor
symptoms occur (and hence how often data should be collected),
we segmented the 6-h visit into nonoverlapping intervals of
30 min for each participant. Figure 4a shows an example of this
procedure for subject #6. It highlights the individual 30-min
periods and the severity ratings for tremor of the upper left
extremity throughout the study visit. We considered the subset of
those intervals where multiple ratings had been obtained (the
light and dark gray periods). For that subset of intervals, Fig. 4b
shows, for each participant and each body segment (i.e., right and
left upper- and lower-extremities), the percentage of intervals in
which at least two changes in symptom severity took place. Data
are shown for tremor, dyskinesia, and bradykinesia. Across
participants, tremor severity changed at least twice in 67% of
the 30-min intervals examined for the upper extremities and in
20% of those examined for the lower-extremities. Dyskinesia and
bradykinesia scores behaved similar to one another in the upper
extremities (in each case, 27% of periods contained multiple
fluctuations in severity). In the lower-extremities, however,
dyskinesia appeared to fluctuate more often than bradykinesia
(44% and 2% of periods examined, respectively).

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 6

np)
np}

M.K. Erb et al.

 

A X O O O Xx O 7 Xx O -

 

 

|

N

 

 

|

Tremor Severity Scores
oO —

| T
NO
ow
oO

ae
N i
NS
oO

| |

300

0 30 60 90 120 150 180 210
Time (minutes)

  

100

B tue

6 RUE

E 50

© LLE

=

RLE 5

100

© LUE

o

® RUE

= 50

gw LLE

>

OQ RLE 5
100

©

= LUE

®

& RUE 50

3 LLE

©

mo RLE 5

 

13 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
Subject Number

Fig.4 Dynamics of motor symptoms across the medication cycle. a Time course of tremor severity from the left upper extremity (LUE) of
one participant during the laboratory visit of study 3 (the value of 63% outlined in red in panel b was obtained from this time series). Tremor
severity was obtained each time a prescribed motor task was performed (whether during one of the several scripted ADLs or the rest, gait and
alternating hand movement tasks performed every 30 min). We considered each nonoverlapping 30-min interval during the visit, and
excluded any period that did not contain multiple ratings (those periods highlighted red that have a gray dash above them). Among the
remaining subset of eight 30-min intervals, we calculated the percentage of periods that contained at least two changes in symptom severity
(marked with a green “O” above them). For example, in this participant, rapid fluctuations in symptom severity are apparent in the second,
fourth, sixth, and ninth periods. The remaining periods did not contain more than two changes (marked with a red “X” above them). b All
participants; the percent of 30-min periods during the lab portion of study 3 during which at least two changes to symptom severity occurred.
The cell of the matrix representation that is highlighted in red shows the percentage number of instances of at least two changes in tremor
severity within a 30-min period derived from the plot shown in panel a.

These results emphasize the significant probability of symptom Significant differences in their pattern and responsiveness to
severity fluctuating at a rate that cannot be captured by using treatment exist across individuals. Thus accurate and reliable

diary entries every 30 min. Importantly, the same consideration monitoring tools that report on treatment outcomes on an
applies to live observations of individuals with PD experiencing _ individual basis are especially important for this population.

motor fluctuations. In other words, these results suggest that even Motor diaries have been extensively utilized to gather treatment
live assessments that are carried out at time intervals of 30 min are outcomes in clinical trials as well as in clinical practice."
insufficient to capture the dynamics of tremor, dyskinesia, and —_ However, poor adherence has been often reported, particularly in

bradykinesia, as they evolve over the medication cycle. This
observation underlines an important potential advantage of using
wearable sensors to track fluctuations in motor symptoms since
this approach has potential for generating continuous estimates
of the severity of tremor, dyskinesia, and bradykinesia, hence
overcoming the limitations of more traditional approaches.

the clinic, where anecdotal evidence of patients completing the
diaries immediately prior to their visit is common. The data herein
presented show that the use of diaries is marked by a substantial
number of missed entries. In fact, ~38% of the participants missed
~25% of total possible entries. Moreover, when non-adherent
participants completed the motor diary, they did so with an
average delay of >4h. We also presented evidence that self-

DISCUSSION reports of the presence/absence of dyskinesia are unreliable. In
As the search for new pharmacological and non-pharmacological fact, comparison of self-reports of “on” and “on with dyskinesia”
treatments for PD continues, achieving optimal clinical manage- with clinical evaluations by PD specialists showed that self-reports

ment of motor fluctuations remains a challenging problem.° of dyskinesia are marked by ~35% false negatives and 15% false

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 6 Scripps Research Translational Institute
positives. This is not surprising given that individuals with PD
often lack an objective perception of their motor status.**”°

To address the shortcomings of self-reports, clinicians have
investigated serial administration of structured assessments via
direct patient observation during a single or multiple motor
fluctuation cycles.'* Unfortunately, this approach is costly in
clinical trials and cumbersome in clinical practice, as well as
burdensome to patients. An alternative strategy might be to rely
on video recordings and their off-line inspection by PD specialists.
This is of interest in the context of a telehealth management of
PD'*'*7° and can be implemented by instructing patients to
videotape themselves at set intervals of times (e.g., every 30 min)
during a single or multiple motor fluctuation cycles.*' Our results
showed that MDS-UPDRS part Ill scores generated via visual
inspection of video recordings (i.e., video rating) of participants
with PD experiencing motor fluctuations are marked by a
significant bias. In fact, we observed that scores obtained by
video rating were lower on average than scores generated by live
rating. Interestingly, this was the case for items of the MDS-UPDRS
part Ill related to the assessment of tremor and bradykinesia, but
not for items related to the assessment of gait and posture (the
PIGD subscale). This result suggests that gross aspects of
movement may be accurately assessed from video recordings,
whereas more subtle aspects of movement, such as those
associated with tremor and bradykinesia, may require live rating.

Would then live assessments performed at intervals of 30 min,
although impractical, be the ideal way to assess motor fluctuations
in PD? Our results suggest that this approach would not accurately
capture the dynamics of fluctuations in the severity of tremor,
dyskinesia, and bradykinesia. In fact, we showed that ~ 67% of the
30-min intervals examined for the upper extremities contained at
least two changes in tremor severity, ~27% of such intervals
showed at least two changes in bradykinesia severity, and ~44%
of the 30-min intervals examined for the lower-extremities
showed at least two changes in dyskinesia severity.

Mobile and wearable technologies provide a means to generate
estimates of PD symptoms with high time resolution.'° They may
also offer better sensitivity that human observers may be capable
of enabling the detection of subtle changes previously impossible
to detect. A large body of literature shows that algorithms
designed to analyze the data collected during the performance of
scripted motor tasks provide accurate estimates, compared with
clinician ratings, of the severity of PD symptoms.*” ** However,
future work is needed to derive accurate estimates of the severity
of PD symptoms from the data collected during the performance
of unscripted activities, namely during the performance of
ADL's.'”°° One possible approach suitable to analyzing data
collected during the performance of unscripted activities consists
of implementing the cascade of two modules. The first would be
devoted to selecting data segments suitable for detecting and
assessing the severity of PD symptoms. The second module would
be devoted to generating estimates of symptom burden and
severity. For example, rest tremor assessment might proceed with
the first module identifying segments of time when a body
segment is not undergoing voluntary motion, and the second
module generating estimates of the severity of tremor at rest.
Similarly, to assess gait impairments using the second module,
episodes of gait would be first identified with the first module.

With the approach proposed above, data collected using inertial
sensors in the home and community settings could provide
estimates of the severity and fluctuations of tremor, dyskinesia,
and bradykinesia, three of the four cardinal features of PD.
However, the fourth feature, rigidity, remains difficult to monitor
by inertial sensors alone, because current assessments of rigidity
require the physical interaction between a trained expert and the
individual under examination. To overcome this issue and explore
the possibility of measuring rigidity during voluntary motion, in
each of the studies, we collected EMG and speech data with the

Scripps Research Translational Institute

M.K. Erb et al.

np)

 

intention of investigating relationships between their character-
istics and rigidity.°? Speech is affected by PD,*° and speech
characteristics can be related to UPDRS scores,*” but an
association with fluctuations in rigidity severity has not yet been
established. Ongoing analyses of the data collected in the current
project will determine if speech characteristics can be utilized as a
proxy for the severity of rigidity.

Another important issue that requires future work is the
development of methods to assess fluctuations in non-motor
symptoms in the home and community settings. The relevance of
achieving optimal clinical management of non-motor fluctuations
cannot be overstated.**°*°? Encouraging results have been
obtained by others suggesting that certain parameters describing
heart rate variability are strongly associated with the severity of
autonomic dysfunction in PD.*°** However, it remains to be
determined if continuous monitoring of heart rate variability will
reveal fluctuations in non-motor symptoms. Ongoing analyses of
the ECG and GSR data collected in this project will allow us to
explore the potential role of these measures in monitoring
fluctuations in non-motor symptoms of PD.

These considerations highlight important areas of future and
ongoing work, and the results summarized in this manuscript
show the opportunity to improve PD monitoring, for example by
using mobile and wearable technologies to assess fluctuations in
motor symptoms of PD and specifically fluctuations in the severity
of tremor, dyskinesia, and bradykinesia. The fast dynamics of these
phenomena requires that estimates of their severity be generated
with high time resolution, which makes impractical not only the
use motor diaries but also to rely on the serial performance of
structured assessments. Hence, mobile and wearable technologies
should be utilized to complement (if not replace) traditional
approaches—such as motor diaries—to assess fluctuations in
motor symptoms. However, self-reports appear to still be of great
relevance to capture fluctuations in non-motor symptoms until
associations between fluctuations in non-motor symptoms and
physiological data (e.g., heart rate variability) are established.

METHODS
Statistical methods

To investigate the similarity of our healthy control and PD cohorts, we
performed chi-squared tests of independence to evaluate the relationship
between demographic variables (age, gender, and completed education)
and cohort membership (healthy control and PD). Likewise, to investigate
the homogeneity of our sample of PD participants across studies 2, 3, and
4, we performed the same chi-squared test to evaluate the independence
of relevant variables (age, gender, completed education, and Hoehn and
Yahr stage) from studies 2, 3, or 4.

In studies 2, 3, and 4, the administration of part Ill of the MDS-UPDRS
was timed, per protocol, to take place either immediately prior to the
participants’ next dose of levodopa (labeled as an “off” condition), after a
dose and self-reported confirmation of the participant feeling “on” (the
“on” condition), or at time points in between (labeled as “transitioning to
off” or “transitioning to on” conditions). In studies 2 and 3, we obtained live
in-person ratings as well as 3 ratings from video of symptom severity.
These scores were pooled with scores from study 4 and used to build a
linear mixed model that fit the MDS-UPDRS part Ill total scores with Session
Condition (On, Off, Transitioning to On, or Transitioning to Off), Rating
Context (Live vs. Video Recorded), Years Since Diagnosis, Gender, Hoehn &
Yahr Stage, and Time Since Last Levodopa (min) as fixed effects, and
Subject as a random effect. Significant effects (ANOVA findings) were
followed with post hoc comparisons for least squares means across factor
levels.

Recruitment and eligibility

The project encompasses four observational studies, including both
healthy volunteers and people with PD. Healthy volunteers were recruited
if they were between the ages of 18 and 70. Potential participants were
excluded if they reported the existence of an implanted medical device,
such as a pacemaker or implanted pump, were pregnant or had any

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 6
M.K. Erb et al.

 

condition that would prevent them from completing study activities.
Participant self-report was used to confirm eligibility.

Eligibility criteria for people with PD were intended to be representative
of criteria for ongoing clinical trials investigating therapeutic interventions
aimed at reducing motor fluctuations. People with PD were recruited to
studies 2, 3, and 4, if they had a current clinical diagnosis of PD consistent
with the UK Parkinson’s Disease Society Brain Bank Clinical Diagnostic
Criteria.*° Studies 2 and 3 required evidence from a qualified neurologist,
while study 4 required self-report of diagnosis. All participants had a
Hoehn and Yahr stage less than or equal to 3, when assessed in the “on”
state. They were required to be responding to levodopa, and be on a
stable dose for at least 4 weeks prior to their first assessment. They had to
confirm their ability (self-report) to recognize their “wearing-off” symptoms
and confirm that they improved after the next dose of PD medication.

People with PD were excluded if they had any current history of
neurological disease (other than PD), cognitive impairment, or psychiatric
illness that in the investigator's judgment would interfere with subject
participation. They were also excluded if they currently had cardiac
pacemakers, electronic pumps, or any other implanted medical devices,
including deep brain stimulation devices.

Study 1: healthy volunteers

The first study was a non-interventional study conducted in 60 healthy
volunteers at two different sites (41 volunteers in MA, 19 in NY) in order to
develop an acceptable testing protocol and explore the reliability of
outcomes captured by devices in a controlled laboratory setting. Written
informed consent was obtained from all participants, all relevant ethical
regulations were complied with, and the protocol was approved by
Schulman’s commercial Institutional Review Board. The protocol was
designed with two sessions each lasting approximately an hour conducted
either during a single visit the same day or during two visits on different
days up to 14 days apart. A portion of the protocol has been described
previously.*°

All assessments were conducted in a controlled laboratory environment.
Participants donned 14 wearable devices from two manufacturers (APDM
and MC10; Supplementary Fig. 1). Recordings were initiated at the
beginning of each session and ran continuously throughout the session.

Both visits began with the performance of speech and motor tasks
associated with administration of part Ill of the MDS-UPDRS. A study staff
member facilitated the performance of activities and recorded the timing
of the beginning and ending of each using an electronic CRF application
on an iPad. In addition, several balance and mobility assessments (Mobility
Lab, APDM, Inc.) were performed including: (i) 5-times sit-to-stand, (ii) 360°
turn, (iii) postural sway (30s eyes open and 30s eyes closed conditions),
and (iv) 2 min stand-and-walk. During the second visit, in addition to part Ill
of the MDS-UPDRS and Mobility Lab assessments, participants completed a
series of scripted ADLs representing fine motor tasks, dressing behaviors,
eating behaviors, and balance and mobility-related behaviors. These tasks
were subsequently and identically administered to participants in studies 2
and 3. The instructions given to the participant during these scripted ADLs
are provided in Supplementary Table 1. At the end of the study,
participants completed a questionnaire aimed at assessing the overall
comfort of the devices, whether any device or placement location was
particularly uncomfortable, and how likely they would be to wear either
device type continuously at home for multiple days.

Study 2: people with PD before and after levodopa

The second study was a non-interventional study conducted at a single site
in 35 people with mild-to-moderate PD under controlled laboratory
conditions. Participants were asked to complete a similar protocol as was
done in the first study. Data collection was carried out at the clinical and
translational research center (CTRC) at Tufts Medical Center. Written
informed consent was obtained from all participants, all relevant ethical
regulations were complied with, and the protocol was approved by the
Tufts Health Sciences Campus Institutional Review Board. Data collection
was carried out during two sessions, either during a single visit on the
same day or over two visits on separate days, up to 14 days apart. All
participants completed one of the sessions immediately prior to a regularly
scheduled dose of levodopa (“off” condition), and the other session after
they took their medication and reported feeling “on” (the “on” condition).
The order of the two sessions was randomized across participants.

Upon arriving at the clinic for their first session, participants completed a
study questionnaire that included the 9-item wearing-off questionnaire

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 6

(WOQ-9). Next, during both sessions, an MDS-certified movement
disorders neurologist administered part Ill of the MDS-UPDRS. During
both sessions, all participants completed the same APDM Mobility lab and
scripted ADL battery as was performed by healthy volunteers in study #1.

Study 3: people with PD throughout a complete levodopa
medication cycle

The third study was a non-interventional study in 26 people with mild-to-
moderate PD (26 enrolled, 25 completed both visits 1 and 2). Participants
completed two visits during which they donned the same sensors as in
studies 1 and 2, and additionally shimmer sensors to record GSR and ECG.
Written informed consent was obtained from all participants, all relevant
ethical regulations were complied with, and the protocol was approved by
the Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital Institutional Review Board. On the
morning of each visit, participants took their normal morning dose of
medication and reported to the site 1h prior to their second normally
scheduled medication dose for a visit that lasted approximately the
duration of one levodopa medication cycle (~6 h). Continuous recordings
were initiated and continued for the duration of the visit.

During the first visit, which took place in a controlled laboratory,
participants performed multiple (up to 5) repetitions of the same battery of
tasks described for the previous two studies that included a speech
assessment, part Ill of the MDS-UPDRS, and a series of scripted ADLs and
mobility tasks. The first repetition was timed to occur just before taking
their regularly scheduled medication. Next, participants began self-
reporting, at 15-min intervals, whether they felt “on.” During this
transitioning period, if time allowed, a second battery was performed (a
“transitioning to on” session). Once they reported feeling “on” they
completed a third battery (an “on” session). The battery of tasks, which
lasted ~30 min, was then repeated two more times (“transitioning to off”
sessions) at 1-h intervals with the last repetition timed just before their
next scheduled dose of medication.

The second visit took place in a simulated apartment-style living
environment. Participants were asked to perform activities of daily living
that were self-selected from a different list for each hour they stayed in the
apartment (Supplementary Table 2). During this visit, they wore the same
devices and had the option of being accompanied by a partner or
caregiver. The list was provided to them at the beginning of the visit. Some
of the items were repeated each hour (assembling nuts and bolts and
visiting every room twice), while others were different. In addition, each
hour throughout the visit, study staff members connected to the
participant through video conferencing software and administered a
shortened motor assessment based on a subset of MDS-UPDRS part
Ill tasks.

Study 4: people with PD at home and in the community

The fourth study (NCT03247387) was a non-interventional study in 34
people with PD. The primary objective was to investigate the agreement
between paper and electronic versions of the VA patient motor diary.
Secondary and exploratory objectives included investigating the relation-
ship between continuous measures of motor function made by wearable
sensors, participant self-report of their motor state, and the timing of
Levodopa intake. The study was performed at Boston University School of
Medicine. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants, all
relevant ethical regulations were complied with, and the protocol was
approved by Boston University School of Medicine Institutional Review
Board. People with PD and currently responding to Levodopa participated
in two one-week periods of continuous monitoring with wearable devices
at home. Both periods began and ended with laboratory visits (a total of 4)
and were separated by ~1 month. During the first and last visits
(approximately days 1 and 38), the full MDS-UPDRS was administered by
an MDS-certified neurologist. In addition, during all four lab visits,
participants completed paper versions of the Parkinson’s Disease
Questionnaire, 8-point (PDQ-8), and EuroQOL 5-Dimension (EQ-5D)) as
well as a 7-meter timed-up-and-go (TUG) while wearing sensors. Paper and
electronic motor diaries were completed for 3 consecutive days during
each of the week-long at-home monitoring periods. The mobile
application enabling the electronic motor diary also included a medication
questionnaire, the EQ-5D, PDQ-8, and collected timestamps of data entry
enabling monitoring of several adherence metrics, including whether an
entry was missed, a value was later modified, and the latency between
data entry and the prescribed diary period.

Scripps Research Translational Institute
Reporting summary

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research
Reporting Summary linked to this article.

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the results reported herein can be obtained upon request of
the four institutions that were the legal sponsors of the respective studies subject to
the terms of informed consent provided by participants.

CODE AVAILABILITY

To collect at-home self-reports of motor state in study #4 and monitor adherence
metrics, we relied on a custom iPhone application built specifically for the study. All
other data for study #4 reported herein (demographics, and clinical scores) were
collected manually without the use of software code. Data analysis was carried out
using Matlab (for the dynamics of motor symptoms) and R (to compute descriptive
statistics for demographic variables, implement the mixed model for investigating
MDS-UPDRS Part Ill scores, and perform hypothesis testing of demographic
variables). The code used to complete the analysis may be available upon request.

Received: 10 June 2019; Accepted: 5 December 2019;
Published online: 17 January 2020

REFERENCES

1. Ascherio, A. & Schwarzschild, M. A. The epidemiology of Parkinson’s disease: risk
factors and prevention. Lancet Neurol. 15, 1257-1272 (2016).

2. Dickson, D. W. Neuropathology of Parkinson disease. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord.
46(Suppl 1), S30-S33 (2018).

3. Kalia, L. V., Lang, A. E. & Shulman, G. Parkinson’s disease. Lancet 386, 896-912
(2015).

4. Stocchi, F., Jenner, P. & Obeso, J. A. When do levodopa motor fluctuations first
appear in Parkinson's disease? Eur. Neurol. 63, 257-266 (2010).

5. Olanow, C. W. et al. Levodopa in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease: current
controversies. Mov. Disord. 19, 997-1005 (2004).

6. Espay, A. J. et al. Levodopa-induced dyskinesia in Parkinson disease: current and
evolving concepts. Ann. Neurol. https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.25364 (2018).

7. Stacy, M. et al. Identification of motor and nonmotor wearing-off in Parkinson’s
disease: comparison of a patient questionnaire versus a clinician assessment.
Mov. Disord. 20, 726-733 (2005).

8. Hauser, R. A. et al. A home diary to assess functional status in patients with
Parkinson's disease with motor fluctuations and dyskinesia. Clin. Neuropharmacol.
23, 75-81 (2000).

9. Reimer, J., Grabowski, M., Lindvall, O. & Hagell, P. Use and interpretation of on/
off diaries in Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 75, 396-400
(2004).

10. Papapetropoulos, S. S. Patient diaries as a clinical endpoint in parkinson’s disease
clinical trials. CNS Neurosci. Ther. 18, 380-387 (2012).

11. Vizcarra, J. A. et al. The Parkinson disease e-Diary: developing a clinical and
research tool for the digital age. Mov. Disord. 34, 676-681 (2019).

12. Bonomo, R. et al. Quantitative estimation of motor fluctuations in Parkinson’s
disease. Park. Relat. Disord. 42, 34-39 (2017).

13. Chen, B. R. et al. A web-based system for home monitoring of patients with
Parkinson's disease using wearable sensors. /EEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 58, 831-836
(2011).

14. Dorsey, E. R. et al. Increasing access to specialty care: a pilot, randomized con-
trolled trial of telemedicine for Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 25, 1652-1659
(2010).

15. Beck, C. A. et al. National randomized controlled trial of virtual house calls for
Parkinson disease. Neurology 89, 1152-1161 (2017).

16. Espay, A. J. et al. Technology in Parkinson’s disease: challenges and opportunities.
Mov. Disord. 31, 1272-1282 (2016).

17. Espay, A. J. et al. A Roadmap for implementation of patient-centered digital
outcome measures in parkinson’s disease obtained using mobile health tech-
nologies. Mov. Disord. 34, 657-663 (2019).

18. Teng, X., Zhang, Y., Poon, C. C. Y. & Bonato, P. Wearable medical systems for
p-Health. /EEE Rev. Biomed. Eng. 1, 62-74 (2008).

19. Patel, S., Park, H., Bonato, P., Chan, L. & Rodgers, M. A review of wearable
sensors and systems with application in rehabilitation. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 9,
21 (2012).

Scripps Research Translational Institute

M.K. Erb et al.

 

20. Johansson, D., Malmgren, K. & Alt Murphy, M. Wearable sensors for clinical
applications in epilepsy, Parkinson's disease, and stroke: a mixed-methods sys-
tematic review. J. Neurol. 265, 1740-1752 (2018).

21. Goetz, C. G. et al. Evaluating Parkinson’s disease patients at home: utility of self-
videotaping for objective motor, dyskinesia, and ON-OFF assessments. Mov.
Disord. 23, 1479-1482 (2008).

22. Patient Motor Diary. Available at: https://www.parkinsons.va.gov/resources/
motordiary.pdf.

23. Fox, S. H. et al. International Parkinson and movement disorder society evidence-
based medicine review: Update on treatments for the motor symptoms of Par-
kinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 33, 1248-1266 (2018).

24. Sitek, E. J. et al. Self-awareness of motor dysfunction in patients with huntington’s
disease in comparison to parkinson’s disease and cervical dystonia. J. Int. Neu-
ropsychol. Soc. 17, 788-795 (2011).

25. Maier, F. & Prigatano, G. P. Impaired self-awareness of motor disturbances in
Parkinson's disease. Arch. Clin. Neuropsychol. 32, 802-809 (2017).

26. Heldman, D. A. et al. Telehealth management of Parkinson’s disease using
wearable sensors: an exploratory study. Digit. Biomark. 44125, 43-51 (2017).

27. Keijsers, N. L., Horstink, M. W., van Hilten, J. J., Hoff, J. |. & Gielen, C. C. Detection
and assessment of the severity of levodopa-induced dyskinesia in patients with
Parkinson's disease by neural networks. Mov. Disord. 15, 1104-1111 (2000).

28. Keijsers, N. L. W., Horstink, M. W. I. M. & Gielen, S. C. A. M. Automatic assessment
of levodopa-induced dyskinesias in daily life by neural networks. Mov. Disord. 18,
70-80 (2003).

29. Patel, S. et al. Monitoring motor fluctuations in patients with Parkinson’s disease
using wearable sensors. IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed. 13, 864-873 (2009).

30. Tsipouras, M. G. et al. An automated methodology for levodopa-induced dyski-
nesia: assessment based on gyroscope and accelerometer signals. Artif. Intell.
Med. 55, 127-135 (2012).

31. Rigas, G. et al. Assessment of tremor activity in the parkinsons disease using a set
of wearable sensors. /EEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed. 16, 478-487 (2012).

32. Griffiths, R. |. et al. Automated assessment of bradykinesia and dyskinesia in
Parkinson’s disease. J. Parkinsons. Dis. 2, 47-55 (2012).

33. Tzallas, A. T. et al. PERFORM: a system for monitoring, assessment and man-
agement of patients with Parkinson’s disease. Sensors 14, 21329-21357 (2014).

34. Pulliam, C. L. et al. Continuous assessment of levodopa response in parkinson’s
disease using wearable motion sensors. /EEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 65, 1-1 (2017).

35. Thorp, J. E., Adamczyk, P. G., Pickett, K. A. & Ploeg, H. Monitoring motor symptoms
during activities of daily living in individuals with parkinson’s disease: a review.
Front. Neurol. 9, 1036 (2018).

36. Caligiuri, M. P. Labial kinematics during speech in patients with parkinsonian
rigidity. Brain 110(Pt 4), 1033-1044 (1987).

37. Pinto, S. et al. Review treatments for dysarthria in Parkinson’s disease. Lancet
Neurol. 3, 547-556 (2004).

38. Seppi, K. et al. Update on treatments for nonmotor symptoms of Parkinson’s
disease-an evidence-based medicine review. Mov. Disord. 1-19. https://doi.org/
10.1002/mds.27602 (2019).

39. Martinez-Fernandez, R., Schmitt, E., Martinez-Martin, P. & Krack, P. The hidden
sister of motor fluctuations in Parkinson’s disease: a review on nonmotor fluc-
tuations. Mov. Disord. 31, 1080-1094 (2016).

40. Kallio, M. et al. Heart rate variability in patients with untreated Parkinson’s dis-
ease. Eur. J. Neurol. 7, 667-672 (2000).

41. Lucetti, C. et al. Long-term clinical evaluation in patients with Parkinson’s disease
and early autonomic involvement. Park. Relat. Disord. 12, 279-283 (2006).

42. De Pablo-Fernandez, E. et al. Association of autonomic dysfunction with disease
progression and survival in Parkinson disease. JAMA Neurol. 74, 970-976 (2017).

43. Coon, E. A., Cutsforth-Gregory, J. K. & Benarroch, E. E. Neuropathology of auto-
nomic dysfunction in synucleinopathies. Mov. Disord. 33, 349-358 (2018).

44. Tessa, C. et al. Central modulation of parasympathetic outflow is impaired in de
novo Parkinson’s disease patients. PLoS One 14, e0210324 (2019).

45. Hughes, A. J., Daniel, S. E., Kilford, L. & Lees, A. J. Accuracy of clinical diagnosis of
idiopathic Parkinson's disease: a clinico-pathological study of 100 cases. J. Neurol.
Neurosurg. Psychiatry 55, 181-184 (1992).

46. Pissadaki, E. et al. Decomposition of complex movements into primitives for
Parkinson's disease assessment. /BM J. Res. Dev. 62, 5:1-5:11 (2018).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to acknowledge John Jeremy Rice, a former Research Staff Member
with IBM’s Thomas J. Watson Research Center, who co-led project BlueSky,
contributing significant scientific input and leadership toward the design and
execution of the studies described herein. His untimely passing before the
development of this manuscript meant he could not participate in its publication.
The studies reported herein were largely conducted as collaborations between the

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 6
Np)

M.K. Erb et al.

 

10

sponsor and Pfizer, Inc.; for studies 2, 3, and 4, Pfizer funded the work and the
sponsor was responsible for study conduct and data validation/storage. Study 1 was
sponsored by Pfizer, and conducted internally under the supervision of a commercial
IRB (Schulman which is now Advarra); Study 2 was sponsored by Tufts Medical
Center, Study 3, by Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, and Study 4 (NCT03247387), by
Boston University School of Medicine.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

All authors (M.K.E., D.R.K., B.K.H., K.C.T., F.P., G.P.V.D., J.F.D., P.W.W., H.Z., T.K., C.D., C.R.
B., C.N.D., N.S.K., J.S.B., and P.B.) contributed to conceiving, drafting, editing, and
finalizing the paper. All authors except C.N.D. (who was unavailable for approval of
the final draft of the paper) meet each of the following criteria encouraged by the
ICMJE: (1) substantial contributions to the conception or design of the work or the
acquisition, analysis or interpretation of the data; (2) drafting the work or revising it
critically for important intellectual content; (3) final approval of the completed
version; and (4) accountability for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions
related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately
investigated and resolved. C.N.D. contributed significantly to analyzing the data,
drafting the paper, and is accountable for the results and interpretations presented
herein.

COMPETING INTERESTS

M.K.E, D.R.K., P.W.W., H.Z., T.K., and C.D. are currently, or were at the time of study
execution or authorship, paid employees of Pfizer. J.F.D is currently a shareholder of
NeuroMotrix and Medapplets. P.B. has received grant support from the American
Heart Association, the Department of Defense, the Michael J Fox Foundation, the
National Institutes of Health (NIH), the National Science Foundation (NSF), and the
Peabody Foundation including sub-awards on NIH and NSF SBIR grants from Barrett
Technology (Newton, MA), BioSensics (Watertown, MA) and Veristride (Salt Lake City,
UT). He has also received grant support from Emerge Diagnostics (Carlsbad, CA),
MC10 (Lexington MA), Mitsui Chemicals (Tokyo, Japan), Pfizer (New York City, NY),
Shimmer Research (Dublin Ireland), and SynPhNe (Singapore). He serves in an
advisory role the Michael J Fox Foundation, the NIH-funded Center for Translation of

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 6

Rehabilitation Engineering Advances and Technology, and the NIH-funded New
England Pediatric Device Consortium. He also serves on the Scientific Advisory Boards
of Hocoma AG (Zurich, Switzerland), Trexo (Toronto Canada), and ABLE Human
Motion (Barcelona, Spain) in an uncompensated role. All other authors declare no
competing interests.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41746-019-0214-x.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.K.E.

Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons

7 Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.

© The Author(s) 2020

Scripps Research Translational Institute
