Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

COMPUTER
APPLICATION

      

y Journal of Network and Computer Applications AY
4 iy se x : :
= PU i

EVIE journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jnca

    

ELS

 

Security in product lifecycle of IoT devices: A survey ®

Check for
updates

 

Narges Yousefnezhad**, Avleen Malhi*, Kary Framling >

4 Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland
> Department of Computing Science, Umed University, Umed, Sweden

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Index Terms: The Internet of Things (IoT) paradigm is considerably impacted by security challenges, which has lately

Internet of things demanded substantial consideration. Accordingly, certain reviews and surveys have been presented, focusing on

Product lifecycle disparate IoT-related domains, including IoT security, intrusion detection systems, and emerging technologies.

security colation However, in this article, we solely target IoT security with respect to product lifecycle stages. In that regard, we

Product lifecycle security provide a comprehensive comparison of state-of-the-art surveys in an initial phase which concentrate on distinct

Device security parameters required for IoT security. Further, we present prominent solutions for addressing product lifecycle
security in IoT. In this context, the contributions of this article are: (a) IoT product lifecycle security, (b) secu-
rity taxonomy in IoT product lifecycle, (c) security solutions for each lifecycle phase in product lifecycle stages,
and (d) open issues in these lifecycle stages that pose new research challenges. Consequently, the advancing
research related to IoT security, especially with respect to product lifecycle, is explored through state-of-the-art
developments in the domain of product lifecycle security.

1. Introduction

Internet of Things (IoT) is a future Internet’s vision consisting of het-
erogeneous objects such as transportation systems, home appliances,
factory machines, smart personal devices, or any intelligent products
employed in our day-to-day life on various applications and divergent
situations. Recently, researchers realized that to design an ideal IoT, all
devices should be inter-connected and in the same vein, sensed data
collected into vertical silos should be replaced with communication
among vertically-oriented closed systems (Kubler et al., 2015a). Sim-
ilarly, to make an IoT system ideally secure, vendor-specific security
methods (blue arrows in Fig. 1) should be replaced with globally regu-
lated security models used in all platforms (black arrows). For instance,
it is more efficient to have a concrete identification system over all the
silos rather than having a vendor-specific (e.g., Apple-specific) identifi-
cation method.

With the development of IoT and the market pressure pushing
device manufacturers to launch increasingly smart devices, we see
intensify connectivity amongst smart devices. 125 billion devices are
forecasted to be connected by 2030 (Howell, 2030). However, many
of these devices are deployed without considering the security (Ye et
al., 2017); hence, such connectivity causes an entirely new range of Fig. 1. Ideal IoT security.
security risks. As recently experienced, security and vulnerability of

 

* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: Narges.Yousefnezhad@aalto.fi (N. Yousefnezhad), Avleen.Malhi@aalto.fi (A. Malhi), kary.framling@umu.se (K. Framling).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2020.102779

Received 25 January 2020; Received in revised form 25 June 2020; Accepted 17 July 2020

Available online 22 August 2020

1084-8045/© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Manufacturing 2

 

Product information
Where?
In one or many places?

 

 

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

User 2

o Information
° quéries/updates

 

Fig. 2. The product lifecycle seen from an Internet of Things point of view. Information about the “thing” is used and produced during all phases of its lifecycle

(Framling and Holmstr6m, 2006).

IoT devices, represent major challenges. Threatpost (O’Donnell, 1441)
estimated that over 2 million smart devices are open to hijack with-
out any security solution. Many cyberattacks, like the Mirai Malware
and the ransomware, infect a network of smart devices such as home
appliances, security cameras, baby monitors, air conditioning/heating
controls, and televisions. The subject related to security in IoT has thus
far been overlooked by both industry and academia, to be dealt with
the later stages of implementation and deployment.

In many projects, security tends to be the systematic consideration
that is managed last. The reason for this could be that implementing
security mechanisms even with standard technologies requires e.g. cer-
tificates, keys, access rights, and firewalls, which may demand much
manual work and the involvement of diverse human operators. Many
organizations lack any personnel who would know how to e.g. set up
secure servers or, manage certificates. In order to also allow such orga-
nizations to provide and use lifecycle-related services, it is important
to adjust the level of security according to the requirements of the ser-
vice, rather than always imposing the highest possible level of security.
Furthermore, the need to query and update product information during
its lifetime as illustrated in Fig. 2 is not limited to organizations only.
At least when the users are individuals, extensive security requirements
could discourage the use of multiple services. At the same time, privacy
issues become even more relevant.

In addition, IoT faces various passive and active malicious attacks
compromising the security and privacy of IoT devices that may easily
hinder their functionality in any lifecycle phases and nullify the bene-
fits provided by their services. Several recent works have been accom-
plished to counteract attacks and security issues in order to secure the
IoT devices and to find an improved approach to eliminate the risks,
or minimize their influence on the security and privacy of user require-
ments (Yang et al., 2017). Despite a vast number of studies of such
security challenges in IoT, there is scant systematic literature of the
IoT security challenges, covering security solutions on the entire life-
cycle. A secure lifecycle ensures that acceptable levels of security are
in place from the device manufacturing phase all the way to the dis-
posal of the device. On the other hand, Product Lifecycle (PLC) is so
frequently applied in various areas and diverse industrial products so

that all product features should be monitored in full over the lifecycle.
IoT devices are one of significant upcoming industrial products which
contains confidential data from people all over the world. Besides, the
most important feature which should be monitored constantly on IoT
systems is the security. Security concerns feature in all the phases of IoT
devices from manufacturing to decommissioning. Thus, it is essential to
investigate security challenges of IoT devices in all stages and phases of
the lifecycle.

1.1. Contributions

e Initially, a comprehensive comparison has been performed to inves-
tigate discrete IoT security surveys in literature to establish the
importance of the topic of lifecycle.

e The state-of-the-art security solutions are categorized based on the
product lifecycle stages of Begining of Life (BoL), Middle of Life
(MoL), and End of Life (EoL).

e A comparative study is conducted for the existing security solutions
based upon their distinctive properties.

e Some open issues encountered while reinforcing security in each of
the lifecycle stages are discussed.

The current article aims to bridge the gap in earlier study by per-
forming a comprehensive analysis of IoT security issues and their solu-
tions in the entire life of a device.

1.2. Article roadmap

This survey article comprehensively discusses the different secu-
rity solutions available currently from th IoT product lifecycle perspec-
tive. The existing security solutions are classified according to security
issues in each of the lifecycle phases in lifecycle stages of BoL, MoL,
and EoL. The state-of-the-art security solutions are compared based on
various security parameters and finally the article discusses the open
issues related to disparate security challenges. Fig. 3 shows the article
roadmap.
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Security in PLC of IoT

   
 

   
 
    

Review
Planning

Literature
Search

   
   

  

2. Review
Methodology

Conducting
Review

Compiling
Findings

IoT Surveys

 
     
 

3. Related
Research

IoT Security
surveys

Certificate Comparison of
installation existing
surveys

Physical

. Manufactured
security

 
     

5. Security
Taxonomy

Identification

Autehntication
6. Security

Solutions in
BoL

Key Pairing Deployment

 

Access control
Vulnerability
management
onfidentiality
Security
requirements
Integrity

Key/certificat

e update Reownership

8. security

Availability solutions in

EoL

 

key/certificat Decommission

Non- e revocation

repudiation

o
a

 
     
   

Cybersecurity 9. IoT &

in Fog and Related
cloud Technologies
Fog and IoT
security

 

Contributions

Article

1. Introduction Roadmap

 

Article
Organization

Identificatio

Product Trust

lifecycle in IoT

     
   

4. IoT Product
lifecycle
security

Autehntication

onfidentiality

PLC and
security

Privacy

Compromise
detection

Monitoring & Security

diagnosis

Integrity
Availability

 

A
© o
< a
~ c
5
® © 3
c. 3
a o
8 3
wo

 

i te update
7. security
solutions in Updates
_ Software Non.
wees repudiation
Reconfigurati Application
reconfigurati
on

Mobile
security

Corporability

s

      
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
  
     

End to end
security

  

10.
Discussion

      
   

   

Research
Challenges in
BoL

  

Research
Challenges in
MoL

  

Research
Challenges in
EoL

Fig. 3. The roadmap for an article.

1.3. Article organization

The complete paper is organized as follows. First, the methodology
adopted for conducting this survey is reviewed in Section 2. Section 3
presents a detailed study of existing literature over the present security
surveys. Then, product lifecycle and its relationship with IoT, specifi-
cally the security of IoT is discussed in Section 4. Against such a rela-
tionship, a taxonomy of security issues and requirements are demon-
strated which are categorized based on device lifecycle in Section 5.
According to the lifecycle stages BoL, MoL, and EoL in the proposed
taxonomy, security solutions are discussed in Sections 6, 7, and 8,
respectively. Section 9 discusses the relation between IoT and other
technologies by discussing the cybersecurity solutions as well. Finally,
after comparing all the solutions in Section 10 and addressing the open
issues with the sketch of future work in Section 11, we conclude with
our key findings in Section 12.

2. Review methodology

Review methodology was adopted to substantiate the research gap
and to highlight the motivational factor for conducting the survey.
Accordingly, the systematic process of the current article is shown in
Fig. 4. The review process is divided into four steps including Review
Planning, Literature Search, Conducting Review, and Compiling Find-
ings, which are explained below.

2.1. Review Planning

2.1.1. Research objective

The purpose of this article is to comprehensively review literature
related to security solutions for IoT devices based on their lifecycle
phases. Based on this objective, several key scenarios have been identi-
fied which require holistic consideration of IoT security.
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Review Planning
Literature Search
Conducting Review

5 * Temporal study
Analyzing and C :
a cmeiee ¢ Comparative
Compiling Findings Ses

Fig. 4. Review methodology.

¢ Research questions
¢ Search criteria

  

e Exploring database
¢ Existing survey analysis
¢ Finding gaps

 

¢ Creating taxonomy
¢ Finding solutions

 

 

2.1.2. Research questions
To achieve our research objective, a set of research questions were
formulated:

RQ1 What are the existing state-of-the-art surveys and how are they
different from the current survey? Based on what security parame-
ters can they be compared? - This research question is answered in
Section 3.

RQ2 What is the role of product lifecycle in IoT environment and how
does it impact the security of IoT devices? - This research question is
answered in Section 4.

RQ3 What is the security taxonomy which can be proposed for IoT
device lifecycle based on different lifecycle phases in lifecycle stages?
- This research question is answered in Section 5.

RQ4 What are the distinct security solutions that exist in literature for
each of the security challenges discussed in two of the major lifecycle
stages of BoL and MoL? Are there any security solutions which can
cover both stages? If not, which solution exist for each of the phase
of these lifecycles? - This research question is answered in Sections 6, 7.
RQ5 What are the distinct security solutions with respect to End of
Life for a device which is a major research challenge?- This research
question is answered in Section 8.

RQ6 How can the existing security solutions be compared based on
lifecycle perspective? - This research question is answered in Section 10.
RQ7 What are the open issues identified by the current work and how
do they evolve? - This research question is answered in Section 11.

These questions will be investigated using literature as a basis. A
thorough literature review of the security of IoT device over lifecycle
reveals no study describing security challenges in the IoT environment
from the lifecycle point of view. In order to fill this gap, this paper
presents a literature review of security challenges and solution partic-
ularly, and in comparison with the previous security surveys, of IoT in
general.

2.1.3. Search criteria

The keywords IJoT and security are present in each research paper’s
abstract, although the keywords have been selected based on the related
sections including literature review, background, and taxonomy.

The present study conducted contains the literature review of the
qualitative and quantitative research articles during the last 10 years,
from 2009 to 2019 in English language. In this article, we have included
research papers from peer reviewed journals, symposiums, conferences,
technical reports, lecture notes, workshops and white papers from
industry.

2.2. Literature Search

2.2.1. Exploring database

The review methodology selected for this article involves search-
ing appropriate research articles from a collection of databases such as
Google Scholar, Springer, ScienceDirect, IEEE eXplore, and ACM Digital
Library.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

2.2.2. Analyzing existing surveys

Security and privacy have constituted major concerns in IoT net-
works, therefore extensive research has been conducted in various secu-
rity and privacy domains of IoT such as key management, authentica-
tion and access control, and compromise detection. IoT is a novel topic
and to clearly understand the security challenges in such an area, we
examine how other surveys review the security aspects of IoT devices.
Given this concern, the search started from “IoT survey” and ended in
“security survey in IoT”.

2.2.3. Finding gaps

Analysis of prior works helped us establish the research gap. None of
the previous surveys consider the security of IoT devices based on their
lifecycle, and they ignore the importance of security over the entire
lifecycle. To fill this gap, we set out to analyze earlier solutions to build
a new taxonomy of IoT security.

2.3. Conducting Review

2.3.1. Creating taxonomy

Before creating the taxonomy, it is of utmost importance to metic-
ulously examine the appropriate phases over each lifecycle stage. On
the other hand, all security challenges related to IoT devices should
be identified. Once the security challenges are recognized, they can be
grouped based on the device lifecycle. Such categorization leads to a
proper taxonomy.

2.3.2. Finding solutions
Based on the defined taxonomy, the existing security solutions for
each security challenge are extracted from the database.

2.4. Compiling Findings

2.4.1. Temporal study of the references in the article

A temporal study of the referenced articles has been performed in
this section. It is crucial to evaluate the sequence of events associated
with the advancement of IoT security in product lifecycle stages and
the related concerns in attaining higher levels of security. Fig. 5 elabo-
rates the publishing trend of the references investigated in the area of
IoT security over the past decade from 2009 to 2019. The publishing
trend indicates that the research on IoT security has been advancing
rapidly over the last few years. Fig. 6 illustrates the related papers’
count, demonstrating the solutions proposed in the literature for the
corresponding security phase in each lifecycle stage. The evolution of
the security problems in the past decade is being depicted in Fig. 7. It
demonstrates which security challenges have been more prominently

Published papers

45
40 ©
35 ©

30

N
u
©

N
o

©

NO. OF PAPERS

B
w

e
o

©

w

2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
YEAR

Fig. 5. Publishing trend in the domain of IoT security.
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Decommissioned [ij
Re-ownership

Corporabilty

Reconfiguration [jj
Updates
Monitoring & Diagnose
Deployment
Manufactured 9

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90

No. of papers published

Fig. 6. Papers published in each lifecycle security phase.

targeted by researchers each year, portraying the evolution of the secu-
rity challenges in the product lifecycle stages in a chronological order.

2.4.2. Comparative analysis
A comparative analysis is described in Section 10 to characterize
security challenges and their solutions based on lifecycle of IoT devices.

3. Related research

When reviewing the literature, IoT-related security survey articles
can be categorized into two groups: IoT general purpose surveys and
IoT security surveys. They are described in detail below.

3.1. IoT surveys

There are several surveys in the area of IoT representing IoT vision
(Gubbi et al., 2013; Miorandi et al., 2012; Atzori et al., 2010), architec-
ture (Al-Fugaha et al., 2015), elements (Gubbi et al., 2013; Al-Fuqaha
et al., 2015), applications (Miorandi et al., 2012; Atzori et al., 2010),
common standards (Al-Fugaha et al., 2015), and challenges faced par-
ticularly in industry (Xu et al., 2014a). Some of them analyze all of
these features for one kind of objects, such as Internet of underwater
things (Domingo, 2012). Other surveys focus on protocols belonging to
a specific architectural layer, e.g., application layer (Karagiannis et al.,
2015). Most of the IoT generic surveys state security issues as a key set

Compromise detection
Authentication
Access control
Availability

Mobile Security

End to end security

Physical security
identification
Authentication

Identification Access control

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

of research channel since they play a fundamental role as enablers of
IoT applications (Miorandi et al., 2012). IoT surveys which specifically
review security aspects in the IoT environment will be demonstrated in
the following section.

3.2. IoT security surveys

To gain a comprehensive picture of what currently considered an
IoT security survey, we conducted a comprehensive search through the
ACM and IEEE literature databases for a security concept in the realm
of IoT and collected all existing survey papers about the security in IoT
and checked whether such taxonomy (device or product lifecycle) has
already been proposed or not. According to our research, none of the
previous surveys use lifecycle as taxonomy while most of them adopt
IoT architecture layers for categorizing the existing security solutions.
In addition, by means of these surveys, we can review the vision of IoT
security (or security aspects in IoT) including security attacks, security
architecture, security requirements, security issues or challenges, secu-
rity technologies, and security solutions.

Based on the current literature, security aspects in IoT can be classi-
fied as security architecture, security model of a node, security boot-
strapping, network security, and application security (Heer et al.,
2011). If security and privacy were regarded as two separate aspects,
security concerns can be classified to three categories including back-
end of systems, network, and front-end equipment, whereas privacy
concerns should be considered in the device, during communication, in
storage, and at the processing stage (Kumar and Patel, 2014). In addi-
tion, security concerns can be listed according to security architecture,
for example, lightweight encryption and key agreement in the percep-
tual layer, identification and encryption in the network layer, secure
cloud computing and anti-virus in the support layer, authentication and
privacy in the application layer are security requirements in each layer
(Suo et al., 2012).

Security challenges or issues in IoT can be divided into Identity and
Authentication, Access Control, Protocol and Network security, Privacy,
Trust, and Fault tolerance (Roman et al., 2013). Other security chal-
lenges can be Enforcement, Secure Middleware, Mobile Security (Sicari
et al., 2015), Key Management, Security law and Regulations, and Secu-
rity Requirements (Suo et al., 2012). Some researchers shorten the
list and consider only user Privacy, Authentication, Authorization, and
Trust Management as possible security challenges in IoT (Abomhara
and Kgien, 2014). Moreover, such challenges can be analyzed in each

Certificate installation

Certificate installation vulnerability management

Physical security Trust

key pairing privacy

identification identification
Certificate installation integrity compromise detection
Key pairing compromise detection access control
Trust authentication confidentiality
Privacy access control availability
Authentication confidentiality Application reconfiguration
Key update availability key update
Mobile security software update Non-repudiation
End to end security key update key revocation

a

 

Identification Identification

Physical security

Certificate installation

Physical security Physical security

mobile security Access control Key pairing Vulnerability management vulnerability management
Mobile security Trust Identification Trust y 9
End to end security Privacy Authentication privacy
Identification Access control identification
Authentication Non-repudiation integrity
Meu pdate . ast : compromise detection
obile security ntegrity access control

Software update
end to end security
key revocation

Fig. 7. Evolution of security challenges in product lifecycle: chronological order.

confidentiality
availability
software update
key update
Non-repudiation
end to end security
key revocation
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

architectural layer of IoT systems including Perception, Network, and
Application (Yang et al., 2017; Gou et al., 2013). Security requirements as
important security challenges are listed as Availability (avoiding DoS),
Failure Prevention (preserving integrity), and Confidentiality over code,
data, and System Configuration (Sadeghi et al., 2015) along with other
requirements such as Authentication, Confidentiality, and Access Con-
trol (Sicari et al., 2015). On the other hand, Babar et al. (2010) con-
sider security requirements as Resilience to attacks, Data Authentica-
tion, Access Control, Privacy, and so on. Weber (2010) also represents
security and privacy requirements in IoT based on security legislation
in IoT.

Once we know the requirements and challenges toward IoT security,
the next step is to find the security solutions. The security solutions can
be divided into IP-based security solutions and Wireless Sensor Net-
work (WSN) security (Heer et al., 2011) or they can be presented on
each layer of the IoT architecture whether through a 4-layer architec-
ture including Perception (or physical), Network, Middleware, Appli-
cation layers (Faroog et al., 2015; Granjal et al., 2015) or through 3-
layer architecture including Perception, Network, and Application layer
(Zhao and Ge, 2013). Generally, most of the existing security tech-
nologies such as encryption, communication security, protecting sensor
data, and cryptography algorithm can be employed in IoT environments
(Suo et al., 2012).

Apart from common security taxonomies, some surveys analyze
the security of existing IoT-specific frameworks and middleware. For
instance, Ammar et al. (2018) compare the security of the eight main
IoT frameworks (set of guiding rules, protocols, and standards) includ-
ing AWS IoT, ARM mbed IoT, Azure IoT Suite, Brillo/Weave, Calvin,
HomeKit, Kura, and SmartThings. Their comparison shows that these
frameworks use the same standards for securing communications while
different methodologies for other security properties (e.g., authenti-
cation and authorization). Additionally, Fremantle and Scott (2017)
provide a literature review based on a matrix of security and privacy
threats for IoT and review the available middleware such as FIWARE,
Device Cloud, DREMS, and OpenloT and how security is handled in
these middleware approaches utilizing various security requirements.

3.3. Comparison of existing security surveys

The comparison of the current security surveys is demonstrated
in Table 1. Approximately 40 conference papers and journal articles
examine the security problems and solutions for the IoT environment;
however we explore only 27 of them which were published in jour-
nals. Amongst the security challenges which were raised in the previ-
ous subsection, the most common and important challenges are stated
in the table, along with the methodology which the authors adopted
to categorize such challenges and their solutions. According to the
Methodology column, the current literature explores security challenges
and countermeasures from the layer-level perspective or other context
so that first, the survey paper introduces an architecture or a base-
line, then analyzes the security issues such as attacks/threats and/or
requirements/measures based on the architecture layers (Alaba et al.,
2017). However, we introduce new categories based on lifecycle which
includes all possible security issues in all phases and stages of an IoT
device.

Moreover, as seen in the table, none of the survey articles could
cover all the security challenges, neither the security issue nor the solu-
tion. Further, such articles only define the security requirements as
mentioned in the table and rarely present solutions for such require-
ments. In contrast, in the current review, we contribute to all of the
essential security requirements by considering the solutions on the
beginning and middle of life. As the last comparison criterion, we inves-
tigate whether any article applies PLC in their taxonomy or not. There
are only two papers on this domain. Nguyen et al. (Nguyen et al., 2015)
observe one specific security issue (key bootstrapping) in the bootstrap-
ping phase of lifecycle. Heer et al. (Heer et al., 2011) also list a num-

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

ber of security requirements during the bootstrapping and operational
phases. As a comprehensive analysis, we introduce a new taxonomy
where security challenges and their solutions are described throughout
the entire lifecycle of devices, consisting of the beginning, middle, and
end of life.

4. IoT product lifecycle security

Based on the definition presented by (Rink and Swan, 1979), Prod-
uct LifeCycle (PLC) represents the product’s unit sales curve, extending
from its first placement in the market to its removal. In other words,
PLC is a sequence of stages for a new product, progressing from intro-
duction to growth, maturity, and decline (The product life cycle. Q).
Introduction is the gradual sales hike which accompanies a new prod-
uct introduction in the market; growth is considered the accelerated
sales hike which leads to product acceptance in the market; maturity
is the crest of sales growth with the product acceptance by potential
buyers; and decline is expected as the sales decline resulting in prod-
uct replacement or discontinuation (Jeong, 2010). Depending on the
use case, these stages might have less or more importance. For exam-
ple, in the lifecycle of wind turbines, among these stages, the introduc-
tion (or production) and decline (or disposal) are the most important
phases (Weinzettel et al., 2009). Additionally, lifecycle processes con-
tradict the targeted products, hence they can be categorized into three
stages as Beginning of Life (BoL), Middle of Life (MoL), and End of Life
(EoL) (Lehmhus et al., 2015) (Fig. 8). BoL is where everything related
to product development is concentrated, including design, testing, and
production. Once the device is produced, a longer stage, MoL, mate-
rializes to encompass the majority of marketing and sales endeavors,
usage, and services. When the product is discontinued, the last stage
will be commenced. Depending on the type of product and its possible
problems, EOL might be scheduled to recycle, refurbish, or dispose of
the product.

Lifecycle-based approaches are necessary to use for evaluation of
several industrial systems (e.g., renewable energy systems (Weinzettel
et al., 2009)). For instance, in order to evaluate the environmental
impact related to a product from material extraction and manufacturing
to the disposal, LifeCycle Assessment (LCA) was developed (Weinzettel
et al., 2009). LCA identifies the most adequate strategies to improve and
avert shifting of burden among various environmental impacts which
occur throughout the complete value chain (Hellweg and. i Canals,
2014). Tao et al. (2014a) design one kind of an LCA system based on
IoT technologies.

4.1. Product lifecycle in IoT (lifecycle and IoT)

Identically with industrial systems, IoT systems also require anal-
ysis through their lifecycles. There are different categories for device
lifecycle in IoT. Heer et al. (2011) divide the lifecycle of an IoT device
into three stages: Bootstrapping, Operational, and Maintenance and Re-
bootstrapping. As seen in Fig. 9, the last two stages will be repeated
as time passes by. Cai et al. (2014) propose a framework for Product
Lifecycle Management (PLM) which covers all requirements given from
IoT object identification, abstracting, disposing, and invoking purposes.
This framework consists of three dimensions: lifecycle (design, pro-
duce, assemble, utility, maintain, and recycle), product structure (prod-
uct, components, and parts), and information dimension (real objects
and data sources). Furthermore, Tao et al. (2016) define PLC as three
steps: design, production (comprising manufacturing and assemble),
and service (comprising utility, maintenance, and recycling). IoT ser-
vices which contain service producer and consumer transaction can
also be classified based on their lifecycle as deployable, deployed, and
operational (Thoma et al., 2012). IoT technology has sparked a multi-
tude of applications in many domains, including manufacturing indus-
try, healthcare, medical, communication, automotive, and aerospace
(Tao et al., 2014b). In manufacturing industry, during the PLC, sev-
Table 1
Previous surveys on security aspects of IoT.

Research paper Physical Key

security management

Atzori et al. (2010)
Weber (2010)

Heer et al. (2011) J
Miorandi et al. (2012)

Roman et al. (2013) v

Riahi et al. (2013), Riahi

et al. (2014)

Yan et al. (2014)

Sadeghi et al. (2015) J
Granjal et al. (2015) J Vv

Farooq et al. (2015)

Sicari et al. (2015)
Nguyen et al. (2015) Vv

Alaba et al. (2017)

Yang et al. (2017) J Vv
Fremantle and Scott J
(2017)

Mosenia and Jha (2017)

Lin et al. (2017)

Mendez et al. (2017)

Zarpelao et al. (2017)

Ferrag et al. (2017)

Ammar et al. (2018)

Kouicem et al. (2018)

Sfar et al. (2018)
Hassija et al. (2019)

Farris et al. (2019)
Din et al. (2019)

Security
requirements

authentication, integrity
authentication, access control, resilience
to attack

confidentiality
identity and authentication, access control
identification, authentication

availability, integrity, confidentiality
confidentiality, integrity, authentication,
nonrepudiation

Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability
(CIA triad), authentication
authentication, AC, confidentiality
confidentiality, integrity, authentication,
authorization, freshness

authentication, authorization, exhaustion
of resources

authentication, access control
confidentiality, integrity, availability,
authentication, access control,
non-reputation

confidentiality, integrity, availability,
authentication, access control

authentication

authentication, access control, secure
communication

confidentiality, integrity, authentication,
non-reputation, availability
identification, access control

authentication, authorization

Compromise
detection

Vv

Trust

RN

Privacy

RN

Software
update

Mobile
security

Methodology

based on legislation

IP-based security for
bootsrapping and operational
phase

based on systemic approach

trust managements based on 8
taxonomies

based on communication
protocols in 3 layers
based on 4 architectural layers

security on bootstrapping phase
of lifecycle

based on application,
architecture, communication,
data

based on 4 architectural layer
based on 3 aspects
(Hardware/Device, Network,
Cloud/Server)

vulnerability at (edge nodes,
communication, and edge
computing

based on 3 layers

based on 3 layers

intrusion detection taxonomies
based on 4 features
Authentication in 4 environment
(M2M, IoV, IoE, IoS)

for each IoT frameworks

based on each application

security using (blockchain, fog,
ML, edge)

security using (SDN/NFV)
comprehensive analysis of trust
management

Open
issues

Vv

RN

PLC

‘1D J2 poyzaufasnox ‘N

6ZLZ0I (OZ0Z) IZI suonvoyddy saindwoD puv y1omay fo Pousmor
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Beginning of Life Middle of Life End of Life

design, testing
and production

recycling, refurbishing
and disposal

product usage
and services

Fig. 8. The phases of product lifecycle (Lehmhus et al., 2015).

eral applications were presented for IoT. For instance, Yan and Huang
(2008) employ an integration of IoT and RFID for the monitoring of
anti-counterfeiting for supply chain products.

From 2003, IoT was applied as a fundamental information system
which can be used to access product information on Internet (Karkkai-
nen et al., 2003). This loT property can have applications for the entire
PLC from BoL including the design phase, production phase, and sup-
ply chain tracing and tracking, through MoL, which includes operation
and maintenance, all the way to EoL which includes how to recycle and
dispose the product (Kiritsis et al., 2003). For this purpose, IoT archi-
tectures should be adequately adjustable to be employed in any stage or
application of PLC. Therefore, an IoT messaging standard, called the O-
MI (Open Messaging Interface) messaging standard, previously known
as PLM and QLM (Quantum Lifecycle Management) was presented to
fulfill the requirements needed to be satisfied by IoT in any closed-loop
PLM (Framling and Maharjan, 2013; Framling et al., 2014). Sodhro et
al. (2018) review recent works on combining PLM and IoT. They also
propose an integration of IoT and PLM to solve the problems with infor-
mation sharing and collaboration between several communicating par-
ties.

4.2. PLC and security

Although most IoT solutions concentrate on real-time information,
product lifecycle information requires more attention to keep track of
the product during its entire lifecycle (from designing, manufactur-
ing, distributing, operating, maintaining, and recycling) (Kubler et al.,
2015a). From the IoT perspective, the device (or product) and its per-
sonal data all along the device lifecycle should be secured with upmost
attention while coping with the device constraints. Through IoT, attacks
can mostly be instigated from smart devices rather than computers and
common sources (Yang et al., 2017). Hence, these devices are available
everywhere, including all essential information stemming from various
resources to perform the attacks. It means enough resources for per-
forming DDoS attacks. These devices also collect personal information
(e.g., user names, addresses, and their activities), which introduces pri-
vacy concerns for consumers. All in all, in IloT environments attacks or
security challenges can derive from any unpredictable resources and all
the devices are assumed as potential security risks, requiring security
measures.

For investigating the possible attacks in manufacturing systems,
Chhetri et al. (2018) analyze various security challenges and propose
solutions associated with stages of PLC, considering three security fun-
damentals including confidentiality, integrity, and availability. How-
ever, by turning the environment from a manufacturing system into
an IoT system, products will face less security support. For instance,
IoT-based consumer products lack support in case of security and pri-
vacy violations from five different angles: borrow, rent, gift, resale, and
retire. Kan et al. (Khan et al., 2018a) explore these consumer acts at
different stages of IoT product lifecycle.

5. Security taxonomy in IoT device lifecycle

In Section 4, we observed how IoT is used to manage industrial PLC.
IoT devices are considered industrial products which can be deployed
for industrial or business purposes. Therefore, as with any industrial
product, the lifecycle of IoT devices could also be divided into three

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

general stages: BoL, MoL, and EoL. Each of these stages can be catego-
rized into subcategories. During BoL, the device is manufactured then
installed in the smart environment. Next, in MoL, while the device is
communicating with other devices, it should be monitored in order to
diagnose the possible faults, and according to the monitoring observa-
tion to update or reconfigure the device. Finally, in EoL, the device
owner will be modified or at the last phase, the device is required to be
withdrawn from its service.

IoT may confront more attacks and threats in the near future and
right now it is important to know which security challenges we should
be concern about in each stage. We can stop the challenges in later
stages by designing and developing a secure system at the first stage.
For example, in real-life scenarios, Secure by Design is a new practice
by governments toward a safe and comprehensive IoT ecosystem for
consumers. Given this concern, UK government introduces new IoT
security laws for manufacturers of connected devices (Plans announced
to introd). Furthermore, regular monitoring during the device running
as well as device recycling also ensure that the devices still follow
their security criteria which were designed. Security issues specified
for each of these stages and their subcategories (i.e., phases) are shown
in Fig. 10.

First of all, the device is manufactured at the factory where the orig-
inal manufacturer settings are installed. Security should be conducted
from onset in the device itself to present a reliable and attack-resistant
infrastructure for a dynamic environment. One of the security chal-
lenges that can occur from beginning as manufacturer setting is cer-
tificate installation, in which the device certificate creates an identity for
each device to be applied later during authentication and private com-
munication between devices. Another security challenge in this phase
is Physical security, also known as hardware security, securing the sili-
con elements of a device which might be physically accessed. A large
number of physical devices are being deployed throughout IoT envi-
ronments where the security-related information, for instance, remov-
able storage media, accessing software through USBs and easily dis-
sembling devices are believed as vital threats to security (Bertino and
Islam, 2017). Once the device is manufactured, it can be deployed in
the target environment where device certificates could also be installed,
instead of the previous phase. Setting up and configuring the device is
considered a primary process to the vendor for evaluating the security
flaws, as several insecurities exist during device configuration (Alrawi
et al., 2019). IoT device configuration insecurities can be exploited, for
example for gaining access to end-user privilege and spying (Barnes).

To securely build an IoT ecosystem, while on-boarding the IoT
devices, a strong and unique identity within each device should be
established; the process known as identification. During the deployment,
devices pair the security keys with other previously deployed devices,
establishing a trusted channel between users and their devices. Thus,
one security challenge is pairing or key agreement between devices
without any prior security association. Possible object weakness should
be exploited, the activity known as vulnerability assessment. All neces-
sary mitigation measures should be considered and implemented at the
very beginning since any vulnerability compromises the entire system.
Furthermore, before allowing the device to operate, strict security poli-
cies should be properly formulated and implemented to configure the
device (Alrawi et al., 2019) and enforced throughout their lifecycle
(Babar et al., 2011). The importance of these policies underline the
significance of considering Security requirements including authentica-
tion, access control, confidentiality, integrity, and availability. Device
authentication ensures that only authorized devices can connect to a
given service and access control limits the device access to the resources.
Data confidentiality protects data from being accessed by unauthorized
parties. Integrity means that information is not altered, and the source
of the information is original. Availability ensures that information is
accessible by authorized users.

The device is manufactured and deployed in the environment then
it is ready to be used. During the operation stage (i.e., MoL), the device
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Maintenance &

Bootstrapping Operational

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

: Maintenance &
Operational

 

Application
Running

Manufactured
Installed
Commissioned

Rebootstrapping

Decommissioned
Removed & replaced
Reownership & recommissioned

Rebootstrapping

Application
Running

Decommissioned
Removed & replaced
Reownership & recommissioned

Fig. 9. Lifecycle of a device in IoT (Heer et al., 2011).

Beginning of Life (BoL)

Monitoring &

diagnosis sissies

Manufactured Deployment

bide crc Identification Identification Ne
installation WTeter- 1K:

Key pairing sige sie

Physical security Software update

  

Vulnerability

Privacy
management

Compromise

Authentication $
Detection

Access Control Authentication

 
 

  

Confidentiality Access Control

Integrity Confidentiality

quawauinbay Ayunsas

Availability Tassie 8

Non-

syuawasinbay Ay4nsas

Beem ee ee MP ee we ew em ew ew eee ee ew ew ew ew ew ee ee ee ee ee eK

Availability

repudiation

Non-repudiation

 

Middle of Life (MoL)

Reconfiguration

Application
reconfiguration

 

Lifecycle
Stages
Lifecycle
Phases

End of Life (EoL)

Corporability Re-ownership Decommissioned

i Ae=da tic Key/certificate

Mobile security ete revocation

End-to-end
-ro e187

nw
©
ao
c
=

<
oO
>
=
©
s

ga
©
“n

 

Fig. 10. Security taxonomy in IoT device lifecycle.

has to be monitored continuously so that the possible malicious activ-
ity can be diagnosed, patched in subsequent software (or firmware)
updates or reconfigured through application. If the device is mobile,
the security should also be provided in new clusters. During the phase
of Monitoring & diagnosis, the main security challenge is in managing
the equilibrium between trust in the provider of service and privacy
of individuals, contemplating automated complex personal informa-
tion exchange (Daubert et al., 2015). Since the data in IoT are shared
between devices and users, the device privacy or user’s personal infor-
mation should be preserved. At the same time, to apply the shared data,
devices require defined trust levels. Prior to managing trust and pri-
vacy, the IoT system requires connected devices to have unique identi-
fiers during their operation (identification). The next security challenge
in this phase is compromise detection, where an uncontrollable threat
might be found which is often impossible to be identified in advance,
in BoL. Security requirements are the next problem in the current phase.
As mentioned above, they have to be enforced throughout the device
lifecycle, particularly when they are running services while communi-
cating with other devices and servers. Such requirements can be defined
similarly to those explained in the deployment phase, except they are
more significant during their operation in MoL.

Once a threat or malicious activity is diagnosed, managing the soft-
ware or firmware updates for devices in IoT environment is equally
fundamental. The session Key update also occurs When a device joins
or leaves the system for assurance of backward and forward secrecy,
specifically in group key agreement. Occasionally, applications should
also be reconfigured to improve the flexibility in a dynamic environ-
ment; however, it will be challenging since IoT devices have con-
strained memory and cannot store every possible application. To
emphasize device corporability, end devices’ security amidst device and
service provider, called end-to-end security, is one security challenge
during the device operation. It assures both devices that communica-
tion is confidential and cannot be modified in the transit (Abomhara
and K@ien, 2014). Additionally, in this step, mobile security is a secu-
rity issue for consideration since some IoT devices move among the
clusters and handling the security aspects of the device in a new cluster
is challenging for the device vendor.

Finally, the last stage is EoL (or repurposing), where devices come to
the end of their life while being decommissioned or facing re-ownership.
During the re-ownership phase, the device is sold to another person.
As a result, all personal or secret information such should be erased or
updated from it before handing over the device. One important secret
information on all the devices to be updated is key or certificate. Dur-
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

ing the decommissioned phase, the device is no longer operational and
must be disposed of. During removal, it is important to have all secret
information such as key and certificates revoked so that no information
leaks from the system. EoL including Decommissioned and Reownership
is the main contribution of the current paper as none of the surveys in
our review examined it. When a device (e.g., smart car) holding pri-
vate information of the current owner (e.g., location data, Garage door
codes, Phone contacts, and address book) is sold to a new owner, it is
essential to manage the security aspects.

Five out of eight key challenges in IoT product lifecycle are asso-
ciated with security issues found in the taxonomy; Network security,
Data confidentiality and encryption, Objects safety and security, Infor-
mation Privacy, and Naming and Identity Management (Khan et al.,
2012). Common security solutions are useable in the IoT environment
to some extent, although these security solutions require consideration
of the specific features of IoT systems. Fig. 11 illustrates the citations
of the various security solutions adopted by the earlier researchers in
a hierarchical manner to secure various security challenges in various
product lifecycle stages. It provides an overview of the general findings
of the paper. Table 2 displays the existing studies contributing to each
security challenge according to the lifecycle stages of BoL, MoL, and
EoL. A detailed description of such security solutions related to each of
the categories will be reviewed in the following three sections according
to their order at lifecycle.

6. Security solutions in beginning of life (BoL)

This section discusses the proposed security solutions in BoL and
categorizes them based on various lifecycle phases of Manufactured and
Deployment.

6.1. Manufactured

This lifecycle phase can involve two security challenges i.e., certifi-
cate installation and physical security. The following sections present
the proposed solutions for each of these security challenges.

6.1.1. Certificate installation

Deploying certificates in network scenarios has benefits such as no
need for extra hardware, no burden on end user, and featuring a simple
lifecycle management. Considering these benefits, it can be used for
several purposes including mutual authentication, easily deployed with
optional automatic installs and renewals, and native compatibility with
applications and networks.

The certificate might be installed in beginning of life during the
manufactured phase or deployed phase. The IoT device can present
manufacturer-installed device certificate as part of the initial authen-
tication process (Pularikkal et al., 2018) or can employ implicit cer-
tificates for mutual authentication between end-users and sensors by
requesting security-related information and certificates from the trusted
authority (Porambage et al., 2014a). However, in the IoT environ-
ment, the connection to an online Certificate Authority (CA) is usu-
ally unavailable or unstable (Chien, 2018). Therefore, the role of CAs
should be assigned to distributed nodes (Won et al., 2018). On the other
hand, in the absence of standard protocols for installing and updat-
ing the certificates, it is troublesome for the owners of IoT devices to
manipulate the certificates for their devices. Thus, device manufactur-
ers often install certificates on the devices on behalf of the device own-
ers. This also increases the leakage risk of privates keys from manufac-
turers (Won et al., 2018). For this reason, an extra validation center,
called certified accreditation center, can verify the validity of the man-
ufacturer and the device (Garcia-Magarino et al., 2019). A summary of
solutions for certificate installation in IoT is presented in Table 3.

10

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

6.1.2. Physical security

The distributed nature of IoT makes it attractive to a larger attack
surface and physical access to the devices. The combination of these
two factors makes physical security a viable and potent threat to IoT
devices. However, we expect most security attacks to take place at
the software level due to its popularity and coverage of a multitude of
devices, but most unusual attack happen on physical signals (Xu et al.,
2014b). Thus, security should be considered right from the beginning
of device design for providing an adjustable base for dynamic detection
and prevention, isolation, diagnosis, and remedies counter to strong
breaches (Babar et al., 2011).

In general, physical attacks are concentrated on the physical compo-
nents of the IoT system and the attacker need to be physically close or in
the IoT system (Andrea et al., 2015). Some physical attacks pose severe
security problems where hardware devices are tampered for example
by extracting sensitive information using micro-probing. These attacks
can also be triggered by reverse engineering, which has several steps
including chip de-packaging, layout reconstruction, and chip modifica-
tion using particle beam techniques (Babar et al., 2010). On the other
hand, physical attacks can occur on the infrastructure of an IoT, e.g.,
changing the behavior or structure of IoT devices (Nawir et al., 2016).
On such a category, an attacker can cause damage to sensor nodes
physically or remotely (node tampering), can prevent communication
by sending noise signals over the communication channel (RF interfer-
ence on RFIDs and node jamming in WSN), can control the node or the
entire system by means of physically deploying a new malicious node
(malicious node injection) or physically injecting codes (malicious code
injection), and finally can increase the power consumption by keeping
the node awake (sleep deprivation) (Andrea et al., 2015). Fig. 12 shows
these two categories and their subcategories for physical attacks.

Physical security is mostly targeted in Perception layers of the IoT
architecture in which RFID and WSN are two important components.
From the RFID perspective, SCA (Side Channel Attack) can pose a major
problem while from the WSN perspective, node and antenna design are
considered important (Zhao and Ge, 2013). To address physical secu-
rity in IoT, Table 4 shows the summary of approaches. For instance,
Babar et al. (2011) propose an embedded security framework in which
physical security is provided by employing a Trusted Platform module
to manage the vulnerabilities of the hardware devices at the physical
level. As a hardware-based IoT security approach, Xu et al. (2014b)
adopt Computer-aided design (CAD) techniques to address IoT security
constraints alongside with energy problems.

In order to discover proper countermeasures to physical attacks,
critical physical assets in an environment can be identified assessing
the security risks of a smart environment. For instance, Ali and Awad
(2018) apply the operationally critical threat, asset, and vulnerability
evaluation (OCTAVE) methodology for identification of security risks
in smart homes. During the system design and operation phases, a man-
agement procedure mixture (e.g. for tracking misplaced devices) and
protocols (e.g., internal memory reset, renewal of keys) can be applied
as a security framework to configure the devices through a secure chan-
nel (Pecorella et al., 2016). Another secure analytical framework for IoT
was proposed based on stochastic geometric and queue theory to inves-
tigate the delay performance and security performance of IoT networks
(Zhang et al., 2017a).

Combining the physical layer security with upper layer security
mechanisms could enhance the information security in the multi-access
mobile edge computing (MA-MEC) based IoT. Physical layer security
approaches involve the secure wiretap coding, resource allocation, sig-
nal processing, and multi-node cooperation, along with the physical
layer key generation and authentication (Zhang et al., 2017a).

6.2. Deployment

Since not all manufacturers are willing or capable to manage secu-
rity critical tasks, it is not acceptable to expect manufacturers to provide
N. Yousefnezhad et a

Security solutions

L

Pre-installed certificate [70][71]
Distributed CA [72] [73]

 

Certificate installation

Manufactured Embedded security [67]

Hardware based security [74]
Analytical framework [75][76][77]

Physical security

Chipless identification [78][81]
Device identification [79][80]

Identification

 

Key management protocol [70][83]

 

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Key Pairing
BoL Context-based [82]
Vulnerability assessment [84][86]
Vulnerability management
Deployment Vulnerability identification [85][87]
Authentication Identity based cryptography [88]
Access control Attribute based access control [88]
Confidentiality Hardware based cryptography [89]
Security requirements / Integrity identification [91]
Integrity
Integrity protection [90]
Availability Availability analysis [92][93]
Non-repudiation Authentication protocol [94]
Identity management [95][98][99][102][103]
Identification
Device identification [101][104]
Trust Trust management [73][107][108][109][110][111][112]
Privacy-preserving [115][116][117]
Privacy
Privacy management [113][114]
Compromise detection [120][121]
Compromise detection
Intrusion detection [118][122][123][124]
Two factor authentication [130][131]
Two phase authentication [127][244]
Authentication / Mutual authentication [125][132][133][134][136][13 7]
Group authentication [128][129]
Anonymous authentication [126][135]
Centralized model [138][142][146][150][153]
Capability based [139][140][141][143][144][145]
. : ; Access control Distributed model Attribute based [148][149][154]
Monitoring and diagnosis Security requirements
Trust based [147]
Hybrid model [219][151][152]
Cryptography based [156][157]
Confidentiality
Confidentiality preserving [158][159]
Attack based [162][163]
Integrity
Integrity framework [160][161]
Availability preserving [166][167][168][169][170]
MoL Availability YP g
Availability assessment [164][165]
| Fog computing based [171]
Non-repudiation
| Blockchain based [172]
Group key management [129][173][174][176]
Key/certificate update
Dynamic public key certificate [175]
Updates Distributed update [178][181]
Peer to peer update [179]
Software update
Edge computing [180]
Trust based [177]
; ; Environment adaptive reconfiguration [182]
Reconfiguration Application reconfiguration
< Dynamic partial reconfiguration [183]
Authentication [185][187][191]
Security model Intrusion prevention [190]
Mobile security Privacy preserving [186][191]
Corporability Security architecture [184][188]
Security standard [192]
Mobility enabled [196]
End to end security Security protocol [193][194][195][198]
Biometric based [197]
Key/ i q Ownership transfer [201][203]
Re- hi ey/certificate update
emownersnp Re-ownership [200][202]
EoL

Key revocation [204][206]

Key/certificate revocation
CRL-based [205][207]

Decommissioned

Fig. 11. Overview of the literature for security mechanisms in IoT product lifecycle.

11
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Table 2

Security issues in each phase of lifecycle.

Lifecycle stage
BoL

Access control

MoL

EoL

Table 3

Security issue

Certificate installation
Physical security
Identification

Key pairing

Vulnerability management

Authentication
Neto et al. (2016)
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
Non-repudiation
Identification

Trust

Privacy
Compromise detection

Authentication

Access control

Confidentiality

Integrity
Availability

Non-repudiation
Key/Certificate update
Software update

Application reconfiguration
Mobile security

End-to-end security

Key/Certificate update
Key/Certificate revocation

Certificate installation solutions in IoT.

Scheme

Won et al. (2018)

Hanel et al. (2017)

Sciancalepore et al. (2015)

Garcia-Magarifio et al. (2019)

security critical services (Sethi and Aura). Thus, security should be con-
sidered during other phases such as device deployment and operation.
Security issues targeting the deployment phase are discussed below.

6.2.1. Identification

The multitude of physical devices and users rely on trusted services

Method

IoT-PKI, a distributed and secure PKI

ASREID, an adjustable security system for RFID-equipped sensors

preloading certificates in each device by the network administrator before the
deployment of the network

digital certificate for authenticating vehicles

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Citations

(Sciancalepore et al., 2015; Hanel et al., 2017; Won et al., 2018; Garcia-Magarinio et al., 2019)
(Babar et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2014b; Pecorella et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017a; Ali and Awad, 2018)
(Attaran and Rashidzadeh, 2016; Miettinen et al., 2017; Berelejis et al., 2017; Corchia et al., 2019)
(Sciancalepore et al., 2015; Miettinen et al., 2014a; Tsai et al., 2017)

(Alrawi et al., 2019; Samtani et al., 2016; Alghamdi et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Costa et al.,
2019)

Neto et al. (2016)

Valea et al. (2019)

(Zhang et al., 2017b; Chamarajnagar and Ashok, 2019)

(Wu et al., 2019; Mustafa et al., 2019)

Oriwoh et al. (2016)

(Sarma and Girdo, 2009; Mahalle et al., 2010; Hu et al., 2011; Horrow and Sardana, 2012; Fremantle
et al., 2014; Fremantle and Aziz, 2016; Meidan et al., 2017; Kravitz and Cooper, 2017; Song et al.,
2017; Yousefnezhad et al., 2018; Santos et al., 2018, 2019)

(Garcia-Magarino et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2014, 2016; Namal et al., 2015; Alexopoulos et al., 2018;
Tariq et al., 2019; Alshehri and Hussain, 2019)

(Ukil et al., 2014, 2015; Boussada et al., 2018; Jourdan et al., 2018; Guan et al., 2019)

(Raza et al., 2013; Taneja, 2013; Jia et al., 2017; Nguyen et al., 2018; Doshi et al., 2018; Li et al.,
2019; Yahyaoui et al., 2019)

(Zhao et al., 2011; Alcaide et al., 2013; Porambage et al., 2014a; Petrov et al., 2014; Mahalle et al.,
2014; Shivraj et al., 2015; Crossman and Liu, 2015; Devi et al., 2015; Kalra and Sood, 2015; Fan et
al., 2016; Yang et al., 2016; Aman et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017)

(Zhang and Gong, 2011; Mahalle et al., 2012a, 2012b, 2013; Anggorojati et al., 2012; Liu et al.,
2012; Ramos et al., 2013; Gusmeroli et al., 2013; Moreno-Sanchez et al., 2013; Riad and Zhu, 2017;
Huang et al., 2018; Kolluru et al., 2018; Hwang et al., 2018; Bouanani et al., 2019; Pal et al., 2019;
Salonikias et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2019)

(Purohit et al., 2017; Al-Turjman and Alturjman, 2018; Khalaf and Mohammed, 2018; Eugster et al.,
2019; Hurrah et al., 2019)

(Bauer et al., 2016; Bhattacharjee et al., 2017; Aman et al., 2018; Battisti et al., 2018)

(Kryvinska and Strauss, 2013; Kolisnyk et al., 2017; Tsai et al., 2018; Qaim and. Ozkasap, 2018; Dinh
and Kim, 2018; Xiong et al., 2019; Yang and Kim, 2019)

(Abbas et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019)

(Mahalle et al., 2014; Abdmeziem et al., 2015; Kung and Hsiao, 2018; Chien, 2018; Arif et al., 2019)
(Huth et al., 2016; WeifSbach etal., 2016; Boudguiga et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2018; Kolomvatsos,
2018)

(Zhang et al., 2005; Samir et al., 2019)

(Yan and Wen, 2010; Miao and Wang, 2012; Zhu et al., 2012; Jara et al., 2013; Goncalves et al.,
2013; Kai et al., 2013; Jeong et al., 2014; Niu et al., 2014; Kubler et al., 2015b)

(Brachmann et al., 2012a; Hummen et al., 2013a; Sahraoui and Bilami, 2015; Moosavi et al., 2016;
Hossain et al., 2016; Banerjee et al., 2018)

(Leng et al., 2014; Ghuli et al., 2017; Mamun et al., 2018; Khan et al., 2018b; Aghili et al., 2019)
(Raza et al., 2016; Duan et al., 2018; Bock et al., 2019; Cebe and Akkaya, 2019)

Remarks

assigning the role of CAs to distributed
blockchain nodes

reducing the overhead of device
pre-equipping of security information by
providing various selection for
pre-installed certificates

generating ultra-lightweight “implicit”
certificates exploiting the Elliptic Curve
Qu-Vanstone (ECQV) technique
requesting a digital certificate from
certifier, checking the vehicle by certified
accreditation center, and incorporating
private key to the vehicle

authentication (Abomhara and Kgien, 2014). The analysis of the five
applicable Service Oriented Architecture (SOA)-based identity manage-
ment, i.e., Higgins, Shibboleth, Card-Space, Liberty Alliance and OpenId
demonstrates that IoT requirements are fulfilled by any of them, hence
requiring advanced IDM systems (Mahalle et al., 2010). Currently, iden-
tities are used as an entity for every end-user device, allowing them to
identify themselves using their own identity (Roman et al., 201 1a).

to authenticate with each other, so it is crucial for IoT to have identity

12
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

     
     
   

De-packaging of chip
Reverse engineering Layout reconstruction

Hardware Micro-probing Particle beam techniques

 

Physical damage
Node tampering

RF interference on RFID

)
oe
oO
sc}
13}
Oo
To]
2
D
>
=
a

fan Cele [eM Te nlenltal alam Wes)

 

 

Malicious node injection

Malicious code injection

 

Sleep deprivation

Fig. 12. Physical attacks.

To apply identification in the deployment stage of IoT devices, one
possible solution is to improve the installed RFID tags. For this rea-
son, chipless RFID tags were implemented, which can be programmed
to a unique code by end-users (Attaran and Rashidzadeh, 2016). Chip-
less tags are resistant to a harsh environment and thus they can be
employed in wearable electronics. To solve the problem of data encod-
ing in tags with no IC, two encoding strategies, resonance-based coding
and frequency-shift encoding, were presented by Corchia et al. (2019).
In addition, Miettinen et al. (2017) propose an identification method
for new devices joining the network (e.g., home network). In the home
gateway, it checks the packets coming from the new device, creates
a matrix for this device based on its behaviors (column = a packet,
row = feature), and uses Random Forest to classify the device either
as trusted or non-trusted. If it is untrusted, it can send the packet to
internet but not to other trusted nodes inside the network. Device iden-
tification can also be verified by an IoT device image which is captured
and received from a user device, showing some portion of the environ-
ment around the IoT device (Berelejis et al., 2017). A summary of the
identification methods in the early stage is presented in Table 5.

6.2.2. Key pairing (key agreement)

Key pairing as initiation step of key management, establishes keys
for other security solutions, such as secure communication, authenti-
cation, and access control (Miettinen et al., 2018). For this purpose,
Roman et al. (2011b) analyze the role of current key management
systems in IoT and conclude that they could be employed in Internet-
enabled sensor (IoT) networks. For this purpose, first they find security
issues of a globally connected WSN including secure channels and key
management. Then, they analyze the suitability of public key cryptog-
raphy (PKC) and the protocols for pre-sharing keys for negotiation of
session keys amidst the sensor device and other entities externally in the

Table 4
Physical security in IoT.
Scheme Method
Babar et al. (2011) embedded security framework (in-built
security in the device)
Ali and Awad (2018) risk assessment approach
Xu et al. (2014b) Computer-aided design (CAD)
Pecorella et al. (2016) a security framework for the device
initialization
Zhang et al. (2017a) physical layer security for securing IoT

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

internet. Finally, they analyze other KMPs for WSN (e.g., mathematical-
based KMS) for checking the usage of KMS protocols in negotiation of
session keys among the remote entities.

As part of key management, key pairing is a central agreement
between personal devices without any prior security association.
Table 6 summarizes the current approaches for key pairing. For exam-
ple, Sciancalepore et al. (2015) adduced a protocol based on key man-
agement for IoT systems using Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) pro-
viding security benefits such as protection against replay attacks, fast
re-keying, lightweight node authentication and robust key negotiation.
During pairing, the user is typically involved in verifying the key nego-
tiation for example by comparing the authentication string. However,
it is cumbersome and error-prone to involve the user. Thus, Miettinen
et al. (2014a) present a secure zero-interaction pairing well suited for
wearable and other IoT devices. In this scheme, the correct devices are
identified based on sustained co-presence over time by computing a
fingerprint of the ambient context.

6.2.3. Vulnerability management

A vulnerability refers to a known weakness in a device where an
attacker circumvents the security controls by manipulating any physi-
cal device. A considerable number of IoT devices available publicly with
consumers are at risk of vulnerability (Williams et al., 2017). Therefore,
to ensure the continued security of systems, testing for vulnerabilities
is critical for a quick response. Further, vulnerability management is
employed by IoT device vendors to identify vulnerabilities within their
system and mitigate them prior to exploitation (Samtani et al., 2016).
Vulnerability management in IoT firmware is classified into four types:
static analysis, symbolic execution, fuzzing on emulators and compre-
hensive testing (Xie et al., 2017).

Vulnerabilities might be different, depending on the target environ-
ment. For instance, in smart homes, exploited vulnerabilities are more
likely to stem from lacking security updates, insecure web application
and services authentication, insecure services exposed to the internet,
and insecure network communications (Costa et al., 2019). Once vul-
nerabilities and attack techniques are identified by some tools such as
IoTVerif (Alghamdi et al., 2018), some mitigation should be proposed.
Alrawi et al. (2019) present some mitigation to address vulnerabilities
during device deployment in smart homes, relying on analysis of com-
ponents such as mobile application, service communication channels
and end-points. A summary of vulnerability identification and assess-
ment techniques is displayed in Table 7.

6.2.4. Security requirements

Security requirements are measures that are employed to protect the
device and device communications. The primary security goals includ-
ing integrity, availability and confidentiality, are used to derive these
security requirements as listed in the following sections.

Authentication: A key contributor to several documented attacks can
be weak or IoT services may lack authentication (Alrawi et al., 2019).
In order for the attackers to prevent insertion of a malicious activity to

Remarks

providing a dynamic prevention, detection, diagnosis, isolation, and
countermeasures against breaches

identifying security threats and the potential risks emanating from inside and
outside smart homes

using hardware-based security approaches to be more resilient against side-channel
and physical attacks

providing a secure and error proof configuration for cryptographic keys of devices

appropriate for the secure application scenarios with low-cost and energy-limited
devices

13
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Table 5
Identification during BoL in IoT.

Scheme Method

Miettinen et al. (2017) IOT SENTINEL, an automated device-type
identification

chipless RFID tags

robust chipless identification tags

device identification with an image of the

Attaran and Rashidzadeh (2016)
Corchia et al. (2019)
Berelejis et al. (2017)

IoT device
Table 6
Key pairing in IoT.
Scheme Method

Miettinen et al. (2014a) zero-interaction pairing

Sciancalepore et al. (2015) robust key negotiation, as part of key
management protocol

key establishment scheme by Kronecker
product

Tsai et al. (2017)

Table 7
Vulnerability management in IoT.

Scheme Method

Costa et al. (2019) a method to identify high-risk
vulnerabilities in smart home

IoTVerif, an automated tool learning and
identifying the secure vulnerabilities
active and passive vulnerability
assessment

a vulnerability assessment method

Alghamdi et al. (2018)
Samtani et al. (2016)
Wang et al. (2018)

Alrawi et al. (2019) a modeling methodology on home-based

IoT devices

the network, there is need for device identity authentication. Further,
the service provider must be convinced by the devices for the storage
of their information (Horrow and Sardana, 2012). Current authentica-
tion mechanisms are accessible to malicious attacks and can distort the
advancement due to heterogeneity in IoT devices, topology, and pro-
tocols (Shivraj et al., 2015). Such mechanisms are usually designed for
special use cases and are difficult to apply on all IoT devices in general.
Moreover, most of them facilitate authentication during one stage of
IoT device lifecycle, or do not consider all stages at once. For this pur-
pose, an authentication method is designed and developed in (Neto et
al., 2016) to provide authentication to all stages in a device’s lifecycle
(See Table 8).

Access Control (AC): While IoT sensing devices, such as RFID devices
perceive corresponding information in the IoT environment, security
challenges such as unauthorized access of users, or stealing and mod-
ification of information by attackers through a counterfeit of legiti-
mate reader, could be met (Li et al., 2011). Therefore, access of users
and devices should be partially covered during the IoT device deploy-
ment, through access control mechanism. Access control technologies
are well-known in preventing legitimate users to access unauthorized
resources and in allowing legitimate users to access only authorized
resources (Liu et al., 2012). Access control can also be employed to
define a security model during design and implementation, similarly to
the access control mechanism proposed in (Yousefnezhad et al., 2017)
which is able to regulate the access rights for two IoT-specific messag-
ing standards (i.e., O-MI and O-DF).

According to the most recent surveys on access control approaches
in IoT, access control models can be categorized into three architec-
tures: Centralized models eg. RBAC and OrBAC; Distributed models

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Remarks

identifying the types of devices introduced to a network and employing mitigation
measures for device-types with potential security vulnerabilities

using micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) technology

using two strategies for encoding information in chipless tags

capturing the image by user device and transmitting the image from the user device
to the IoT device

Remarks

identifying the correct device based on sustained co-presence over time by
computing a fingerprint of the ambient context
using ECDH algorithm to ensure secrecy

computing the pairwise key with no communication while decreasing the storage
cost and computation cost

Remarks

verifying if a device is vulnerable to the most common vulnerabilities

verifying SSI/TLS certificate validation of IloT messaging protocols

Identifying a multitude of vulnerabilities on Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition (SCADA) systems

Based on attack graph and maximum loss stream; using Common Vulnerability
Scoring System (CVSS) to quantify and calculate the potential risk of attack path
understanding attack techniques, proposed mitigation, and stakeholder
responsibilities according to component analysis

14

eg. O20, ABAC, multi-OrBAC, PolyOrBAC, UCON and CAPBAC; Hybrid
models eg. Smart-OrBAC (Bouanani et al., 2019). Among these mod-
els, RBAC and ABAC cannot be directly used in IoT due to their lim-
itations (Hasiba et al., 2018). To adopt ABAC in IoT systems, Neto et
al. (2016) combine ABAC with ABC so that the later cryptographically
enforces the former (see Table 9). CAPBAC also has some limitation
for IoT since it does not consider the access control decision-making
process (Bouanani et al., 2019). A survey on various access control pro-
tocols and architectures (i.e., AllJoyn, LMW2M, UMA, ACE, OAuth 2.0,
SAML, and XACML) and their applicability in IoT is presented in (Bertin
et al., 2019).

Confidentiality: The most fundamental data issue in IoT security is
data confidentiality. Data confidentiality ensures that the data should
be accessed by authorized entities and prevented from being invaded
by unauthorized entities (Lu and Xu, 2019). Confidentiality during
deployment can be threatened by many attacks such as malicious data
attacks, node capture attacks, timing attacks, and replay attacks simi-
larly to the confidentiality of the perception layer (Lu and Xu, 2019).
To ensure confidentiality, cybersecurity mechanisms such as access con-
trol, authentication, and data hidden techniques can be employed (See
Table 10).

Integrity: Compromises might not be attained from the malicious
devices themselves but from their malicious input, e.g., data. Data
might be tampered or altered during transmission and during storing
on device, by human or by mis-configuration in a computing system.
Thus, it is vital to guarantee that data are accurate, consistent and
reliable over its lifecycle. This process defines the data integrity. The
integrity generated by device, the software running on a device, and
data stored in cloud all require to be verified by integrity identification
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Table 8
Authentication during BoL in IoT.
Scheme Method
Neto et al. (2016) Authentication of Things (AoT), authentication during

deployment of device

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Remarks

relying on identity-based cryptography to distribute keys and
authenticate devices

Table 9
Access control during BoL in IoT.
Scheme Method Remarks
Neto et al. (2016) Authentication of Things (AoT), access relying on attribute-based cryptography to cryptographically enforce
control during deployment of device Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC)
Yousefnezhad et al. (2017) authentication and access control defining design and implementation principles for access control and integrating
with O-MI reference implementation
Table 10
Confidentiality during BoL in IoT.
Scheme Method Remarks
Valea et al. (2019) secure context saving unit, a hardware providing confidentiality by stream cipher based encryption and integrity by
module easily implementable inside a Message Authentication Code (MAC) derived from the saved context

System on Chip (SoC)

Table 11

Integrity during BoL in IoT.
Scheme Method
Chamarajnagar and Ashok (2019) integrity threat identification framework
Zhang et al. (2017b) random digital watermarking algorithm

as data integrity protection scheme

(Chamarajnagar and Ashok, 2019) and protected by the integrity pro-
tection framework (Zhang et al., 2017b). Table 11 shows more details
about such frameworks.

Availability: Security of connected systems in IoT is challenging not
only because it requires protection against a large attack surface but
only because it requires system availability and real time response to
the presence of threats. One important aspect of availability is node
availability, which is considered an essential index for measuring the
node performance in wireless networks. The availability of nodes is
defined as the probability that the node can work normally in the net-
work or the probability of the available state when the network reaches
a steady state. Such a node state analysis method attacked by mali-
cious programs is analyzed in (Wu et al., 2019), as well as the effects of
the degree of node on its availability based on the node heterogeneity.
Another approach to measure the availability in industrial IoT systems
is to apply inputs of end-to-end QoS analysis, as proposed in (Mustafa et
al., 2019). According to the analysis, a remote IoT device inside a busy
cloud region generates less availability as compared to an IoT device
connected to a less busy cloud region. Table 12 represents a summary
of these methods.

Non-repudiation: Non-repudiation relates to data ownership by

Remarks

detecting from physical attacks on sensor nodes using outlier detection
based on fragile watermark to prevent variety of attacks on perception layer

ensuring that no-one can deny their authenticity. In other words, it is
impossible for the sender to deny its sent data and for the receiver to
deny its received data (Abbas et al., 2019). Hence, non-repudiation is
an important security requirement which provides available evidence
through TTP to prevent an entity from denying its action taken place
via message exchange (Samaila et al., 2017). Lack of effective non-
repudiation triggers lack of guarantee for each parties and it also trig-
gers some attacks such as Repudiation Attack, Masquerading.

Non-repudiation of IoT devices, similarity to other security require-
ments, should be established from the beginning. Oriwoh et al. (2016)
believe that these requirements should be realized at the design phase
since any IoT device which can enable communication is also able
to include embedded security at the manufacturing. Accordingly, as
seen in Table 13, they propose a resource-constrained authentication
protocol, where non-repudiation is supported using PKC in a connec-
tionless environment. In addition, a physical-layer authentication and
non-repudiation system can be used that authenticates the receiver by
employing signal processing and checking if the expected transmitter
at the expected location is used for transmission. This method has no
energy overhead due to allowing reuse of radio signals on physical layer
(Trappe et al., 2015).

Table 12
Availability during BoL in IoT.
Scheme Method Remarks
Wu et al. (2019) node availability analysis in Narrowband by presenting a node heterogeneity model based on node distribution and
IoT (NB-IoT) vulnerability differences then using epidemic theory and Markov chain to establish
node state transition mode
Mustafa et al. (2019) an approach to find end-to-end QoS and running experiments on Device-to-cloud, cloud-to-cloud and inside-cloud

availability of service-oriented cloud

15
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Table 13
Non-repudiation during BoL in IoT.

Scheme Method

Oriwoh et al. (2016) ReCAP, a resource-constrained

authentication protocol

7. Security solutions in middle of life (MoL)

In MoL, while the device is communicating with other devices,
it should be monitored in order to diagnose the possible faults, and
according to the monitoring observation to update or reconfigure the
device. During the operation phase, the device needs to be monitored
continuously to detect any malicious activity.

7.1. Monitoring and diagnosis

During the phase of Monitoring and diagnosis, the main security
challenge is to manage the trust level between the service provider and
the individual’s privacy need, considering the automatic exchange of
manifold personal information. For each of the security problems in this
lifecycle phase, various solutions have been adduced in the literature.

7.1.1. Identification

Sarma and Girao (Sarma and Girado, 2009) introduce device identifi-
cation for handling data privacy in 2009. They propose the use of iden-
tities as representations of all entities including persons, devices, and
software as the communication endpoints (Identinet). They also sug-
gest that digital shadows be employed that portray entities projections
in a communication use or in sessions. Later in 2012, Horrow and Sar-
dana (2012) presented an identity management framework designed for
cloud-based IoT. This framework has several basic functions for devices
including relocation, addition and deletion of devices, authentication of
sender and receiver devices, hosted services identification and registra-
tion of sensors and receiver device to the cloud.

To federate the identity of users and devices in IoT, Fremantle
and Benjamin (Fremantle and Aziz, 2016) propose a security model
which provides secure, random, and anonymised identities that are not
shared with third-parties. In their model, all accesses to device data
and commands are based on explicit consent from users. In this model,
each user’s data are handled by a personal cloud instance providing
improved security and isolation. To make federated identities along-
side with user-directed access control decisions, Fremantle et al. (2014)
show that using OAuth2 as part of the MQTT protocol flow and within
an MQTT broker, a technology extracting from Web is more effective.
Furthermore, for a cellular loT environment, identity can be federated
by reusing the SIM authentication running over the network layer (San-
tos et al., 2018, 2019).

Additionally, as a device identification operating for the entire life-
cycle of devices, Yousefnezhad et al. (2018) propose a framework based
on Measurement-based Device Identification (MeDI), which analyzes
the traffic and exploits payload data as well as statistical information to
identify the IoT devices.

To manage and secure access to the resources and information and
also protecting devices’ profiles, an association of technologies and pro-
cesses, called Identity Management (IdM) is relied on (Mahalle et al.,
2010). Mahalle et al. (2010) propose an IdM framework to deliver ser-
vices of devices, while also providing a device management which con-
ceals the complexity of security management from users. Furthermore,
several versions of IdM such as a distributed IdM (Kravitz and Cooper,
2017), improved IdM protocol (Song et al., 2017), and IdM specific to
emergency situations (Hu et al., 2011) were proposed as described in
Table 14.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Remarks

demonstrating the feasibility of achieving non-repudiation

16

7.1.2. Trust

An important problem in the IoT environment is the lack of trust on
IoT devices. Trust establishment in remote IoT devices can be achieved
with the help of a security service called remote attestation, which
helps verify the remote computing devices’ state (Abera et al., 2016).
To allow trust management, in which devices develop trust instantly
with a reasonable degree of accuracy, an indispensable part of the cor-
rect operation of most IT systems, is needed (Chen et al., 2014). Due
to the distributed nature of IoT, a distributed trust management system
which can scale to global dimensions is designed by Alexopoulo et al.
(Alexopoulos et al., 2018) using distributed ledgers.

Disparate techniques have been proposed in literature for addressing
trust management in diverse IoT systems (Table 15). To support SOA-
based IoT systems, an adaptive and scalable trust management proto-
col is proposed by Chen et al., 2014, 2016. In sensor node-powered
IoT applications, Tariq et al. (2019) present a Mobile Code-drive trust
mechanism to define a confidence level for sensor nodes. Additionally,
the trust levels of IoT devices in the network can be employed to explore
the attacks. For detection of malicious nodes and on-off attacks involved
in bad service provisioning, a fuzzy logic-based approach is proposed
(Alshehri and Hussain, 2019) for restriction of their untrusted function-
ality where it gives false recommendations about other nodes. Trust
and reputation policies can be adopted for detecting hijacked vehicles
(Garcia-Magarino et al., 2019).

7.1.3. Privacy

As IoT develops, privacy becomes a major implication, which means
more than anonymity in IoT. Profiling and data mining services which
involve automatic processes including data collection, their storage,
sharing, and analysis process, can form a potential harm to individuals
(Elkhodr et al., 2012) IoT network traffic can also be analyzed to infer
sensitive details about users and their interactions even when the traf-
fic is encrypted. Apthorpe et al. (2017) examine four IoT smart home
devices to prove it. According to their results, a technological solution
is needed to protect IoT device owner privacy.

Given this concern, privacy-preserving methods are applied in var-
ious IoT environments and applications (see Table 16). For instance,
an efficient privacy-preserving method is proposed in (Boussada et al.,
2018) for E-health systems which relies on a novel identity-based cryp-
tography scheme, called PKE-IBE. To recognize activity and restrict user
re-identification at the same time, a privacy-preserving framework is
presented by Jourdan et al. (2018). Furthermore, since privacy of sensi-
tive data is a major concern for data aggregation applications in the fog-
enhanced IoT environment, Guan et al. (2019) design a device-oriented
anonymous scheme to preserve the privacy.

For privacy management in IoT applications, specifically, smart
energy management systems, Ukil et al. (2015) propose an involuntary
approach (without human-in-loop). To accomplish such an approach,
this paper identifies the sensitive content in sensor data and level of
privacy control required for such content. In this approach, data pri-
vacy will be preserved before the data are shared to third parties and
the user will be alerted in case of privacy breach in shareable data. The
same authors in (Ukil et al., 2014) had also proposed a simpler version
of this privacy management schema in which the data owner can assess
the privacy risk of sharing his private data.
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Table 14
Identification during MoL in IoT.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Scheme

Sarma and Girao (2009)
Horrow and Sardana (2012)

Fremantle and Aziz (2016)
Fremantle et al. (2014)

(Santos et al., 2018, 2019)
Meidan et al. (2017)

Yousefnezhad et al. (2018)
Mahalle et al. (2010)

Kravitz and Cooper (2017)
Song et al. (2017)

Hu et al. (2011)

Method

identification by Identinet and digital
shadows

identity management framework for
Cloud based IoT

OAuthing, a federated security model
FIAM, a federated identity and access
management approach

identity federation for cellular IoT
ProfilloT, a device identification based on
network traffic analysis

MeDI, a measurement-based device
identification framework

identity management framework

distributed identity management
Improved Identity Management (IIDM)
Protocol

identity-based system for personal
location in emergency situations

Remarks

using virtual identities as representations of entities while communicating in SWIFT
architecture
a Publisher -Subscriber approach for proper functioning

not sharing data and identity without user consent and sharing data anonymously
building a prototype using OAuth 2.0 to enable access control to information
distributed via MQTT

reusing the SIM authentication enabling single-sign-on

using machine learning algorithms to identify IoT device type, based on
characteristics of the network traffic it generates

monitoring the data packets coming from smart devices to protect the server from
receiving and spreading false data

managing a device’s security credentials and identity, and interacting with service
providers on its behalf

using blockchain for resilient user and device identity and attribute management
improving both security and performance by maximizing load balancing to service
provider

confirming the identity of the user through the user authentication subsystem and
the level of the emergency through the policy subsystem

Table 15
Trust in IoT.

Scheme Method

Namal et al. (2015) autonomic trust management framework

Chen et al. (2014) adaptive trust management protocol

Chen et al. (2016) adaptive and scalable trust management

Tariq et al. (2019) MCTM, a mobile code-driven trust
mechanism

a fuzzy security protocol for trust
management

trust management on vehicles

Alshehri and Hussain (2019)
Garcia-Magarino et al. (2019)

Alexopoulos et al. (2018) distributed trust management system

Table 16
Privacy in IoT.

Scheme Method

Boussada et al. (2018) privacy-preserving E-health system

Jourdan et al. (2018) privacy-preserving framework for activity
recognition

Guan et al. (2019) APPA, a device-oriented Anonymous
Privacy-Preserving scheme

privacy management for smart energy
management systems

privacy management scheme for smart
meter devices

Ukil et al. (2015)

Ukil et al. (2014)

7.1.4. Compromise detection

Compromise is a circumstance where a threat such as malware,
intrusion, attack or a newly discovered incident occurs which might
harm the overall system. It is impossible or difficult to identify these
threats in advance. Thus, they should be analyzed during their use.
Since currently most IoT vendors provide no mechanism to automat-
ically update the devices, compromises will grow in the IoT environ-
ment. As a countermeasure for this problem, ISP networks require fea-
sible techniques to detect IoT malicious activity (Van der Elzen and van
Heugten, 2017). Compromises might have three steps (Pa et al., 2016):
intrusion, in which attackers exploit the weaknesses to login to devices;

Remarks

based on evaluating trust level in cloud based on monitoring, analysing, planning,
executing, and presenting knowledge (MAPE-K) feedback loop

trust evaluation based on past user satisfaction experiences and trust feedbacks from
other users with similar social interests

trust evaluation based on feedback employing similarity level of friendship, social
relationship, and community of interest relationships for filter

detecting isolating malicious internal sensor nodes based on their forwarding
behaviors

applying a new security protocol to create a secure communication and message
exchange between devices

by analyzing whether vehicles’ messages have any misinformation and using
reputation of the vehicle

utilizing distributed ledger to maintain all access delegations, and reputation scores
of participants in 3 layers: global, group and local layer

Remarks

based on Identity-Based Cryptography (IBC) tackling the key escrow issue and
ensuring blind partial private key generation

limiting the risk of user re-identification by extracting multiple features from raw
signal and analyzing their impact on both the activity recognition and the user
re-identification

using Authentication for data aggregation applications in fog-enhanced IoT system

addressing the problem of involuntary privacy breaching risk minimization by
minimizing the capability of privacy intruders
enabling the user to assess the risk of sharing his private data

17

infection, in which after a successful intrusion, attackers upload and
execute malicious codes to the device; monetization, in which mali-
cious codes are controlled by attackers to spread the malware to other
vulnerable devices.

Due to growing popularity of IoT and weak security IoT devices
have, new categories of malware have emerged such as Hajime decen-
tralized Internet warm (Edwards and Profetis, 2016), Persirai bot-
net (Yeh et al., 2017), BrickerBot (Radware. Brickerbot resul), Mirai
(Antonakakis et al., 2017; Kolias et al., 2017), and other botnets which
explicitly target IoT devices. Since these malware affect the behaviour
of IoT devices and reveal an unknown traffic pattern, one solution for
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Table 17
Compromise detection in IoT.

Scheme Method

Nguyen et al. (2018) DIioT, self-learning distributed
compromise detection of devices
Raza et al. (2013) SVELTE: Real-time intrusion detection
Doshi et al. (2018) signature-based approach for distributed
DoS (DDoS) detection

ContexloT, a context-based permission
system

CBSigIDS, collaborative blockchained
signature-based intrusion detection

anomaly based intrusion detection

Jia et al. (2017)
Li et al. (2019)
Yahyaoui et al. (2019)

Taneja (2013) An Analytic framework

defeating them is to check whether the traffic pattern matches the
normal pattern or not. To do so, Nguyen et al. (2018) presented a
self-learning distributed system for detecting compromised IoT devices
effectively. In this system, devices are classified and profiled based on
their device type and their normal communication behavior which is
used for anomaly detection.

Since IoT devices are controlled by smartphone applications and
smartphones are involved with invasion of privacy and information
leakage, it is necessary to detect abnormal behaviors occurring on
mobile devices to achieve reliable IoT services. For this purpose, sev-
eral mobile malware detection techniques exist which are summarized
as follows. 1. Signature-based detection which employs either static or
dynamic methods to define the signature; 2. Behavior-based detection
analyzes predetermined attack patterns and process behaviors by mon-
itoring information inside a device (host-based) or gathering informa-
tion via network (network-based); 3. Dynamic analysis-based detection
(taint analysis) marks specific data and monitors their process to track
the data flow. Tabassum et al. (2019) also present another category
for intrusion detection techniques which is divided into four groups:
signature-based, anomaly-based, specification-based and hybrid.

The static signature-based solution is a traditional method which is
unsuited for dynamic environments and the dynamic signature-based
one requires large amount of storage for finding certain patterns. Taint
analysis is also highly dependent on the underlying system while an
analysis system in diversified environments must be flexible enough to
adopt different systems (Zhang et al., 2014). Signature-based with some
extensions can be suitable for IoT environments. For instance, Sun et
al. (2017) provide a technique for cloud-based malware detection pre-
senting a reliable data privacy protection for IoT resource-constrained
devices. To detect the malware, this technique proposes a signature-
based mechanism for the cloud server and a lightweight content scan-
ning agent for the client. Behavior-based detection techniques which
have recently received most attention, exploit machine learning meth-
ods to enable automated malware classification. For example, Ham et
al. (2014) apply a linear support vector machine for exploring mal-
ware on Android phones. Vasseur and Seewald (2016) also proposed a
dynamic anomaly detection method based on machine learning algo-
rithms to make the network learn from its mistakes and eliminate the
false positive alarms.

Malware detection tools: IoTSeeker (Qian) is an example of avail-
able tools for malware detection and/or prevention. This tool scans an
IoT network to detect if they are using the default credentials or not
and helps to find Mirai-based malware. After capturing malware sam-
ples, in order to analyze and examine the attacks in depth, a malware
analysis environment, called IoTPOT (Pa et al., 2016), was proposed. In
addition, one common solution for understanding the dynamic threat

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Remarks

using federated learning for device-type specific anomaly detection

safeguarding network from known attacks and adapting existing IDS to IoT-specific
protocols, e.g., 6LoWPAN

employing variety of machine learning algorithms to performs data collection,
feature extraction, and binary classification

detection of malicious app by discovering sensitive actions

no need for trusted intermediary

SVM for WSN intrusion detection, and deep learning technique for gateway
intrusion detection
detecting compromised IoT devices using mobility behavior

18

landscape without exposing critical assets is honeypot. For this pur-
pose, an automatic and intelligent honeypot called IoTCandyJar (Luo
et al., 2017) was proposed to check behaviors of different types of IoT
devices by gathering responses to the honeypot’s requests, specifically
ones expected from attackers, leveraging machine learning techniques
(See Table 17).

7.1.5. Security requirements

This section presents the proposed solutions for the security require-
ments required in operation stage (MoL).

Authentication: The authentication mechanisms for IoT are classi-
fied as: two-factor authentication, two-phase authentication, mutual
authentication, group authentication, and anonymous authentication.
Examples for each class are presented in Table 18. Most of these
schemes are vulnerable to key theft since they employ local key man-
agement and need infrastructure support for key storage (Shivraj et al.,
2015). They have no fine grained control, either, and are impractical in
real-world usecases.

More authentication methods along with detailed comparison con-
sidering their weakness and strength are available in previous surveys
conducted for Authentication in IoT (Ferrag et al., 2017; Saadeh et
al., 2016; El-hajj et al., 2017; Atwady and Hammoudeh, 2017). For
instance, Ferrag et al. (2017) categorize the authentication protocols for
IoT systems based on the target environment including M2M communi-
cations, IoV, IoE, and IoS and represent performance and limitation of
protocols based on such a category.

Access Control (AC): For providing end-to-end data protection, both
in storage and in transit, a cryptographic access control based approach
is proposed by Wrona (2015) which is also based upon Object Level
Protection standard. An integrated approach is proposed by Mahalle
et al. (2013) for authentication and control of IoT devices access
known as Identity Authentication and Capability based Access Control
(IACAC) model. The same authors in (Mahalle et al., 2012a) already
proposed a capability based approach called IECAC leveraging ECC.
More Access control approaches from the perspective of IoT are dis-
played in Table 19.

Confidentiality: Although confidentiality is important during deploy-
ment, it is also considered the main security issue during IoT device
communication. Security solutions provided to address confidentiality
during the phase of MoL are described in Table 20.

Integrity: An IoT device produces a large amount of sensitive data
which are susceptible to cyber attacks including integrity attacks.
Integrity attacks known as tampering attacks are extremely dangerous
since they might go unnoticed till the unavailability of the physical sys-
tem (Battisti et al., 2018). Data tampering attacks can be divided into
two types: data modification and data injection. Among these attacks,
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Table 18

Authentication during MoL in IoT.

Scheme

Shivraj et al. (2015)

Crossman and Liu (2015)

Porambage et al. (2014a)

Porambage et al. (2014b)

Aman et al. (2017)

Li et al. (2017)

Zhao et al. (2011)

Devi et al. (2015)

Kalra and Sood (2015)

Fan et al. (2016)

Petrov et al. (2014)

Mahalle et al. (2014)

Alcaide et al. (2013)

Yang et al. (2016)

Type

Two-factor authentication

Two-factor authentication

Two-phase Authentication

Two-phase Authentication

Mutual Authentication

Mutual Authentication

Mutual Authentication

Mutual Authentication

Mutual Authentication

Mutual Authentication

Group Authentication

Group Authentication

Anonymous Authentication

Anonymous Authentication

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Method

an One-Time Password (OTP) scheme using
lightweight identity-based Elliptic curve method
and Lamport’s OTP algorithm

a smart two-factor authentication utilizing the
existing protocols, hash functions, and encryption
algorithms with a modification of workflow only
a certificate-based authentication approach
including Registration and Authentication phase
for WSNs in distributed environment

a pervasive lightweight authentication and keying
(PAuthKey) technique for WSNs in distributed
environment

a light-weight challenge-response mechanism
based on physical unclonable functions (PUFs)
which not save any secret in the IoT devices and
requires low storage on the server

a lightweight authentication protocol based on
novel public key encryption scheme for
resource-constrained devices

an asymmetric authentication method utilizing
feature extraction, secure hash algorithm (SHA),
and ECC

a new authentication scheme using two
approaches including login with hashing password
or with the help of MAC password

a secure ECC-based authentication protocol
applying g Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (HTTP)
cookies

a lightweight RFID-based authentication protocol
having cache on the reader and storing recent
visited tags

a novel many-to-many authentication technique,
according to passive NFC tags instead of
battery-powered devices using data encryption
scheme

a Threshold Cryptography-based Group
Authentication (TCGA) scheme verifying
authenticity of all the participants (devices) in the
group communication using probabilistic
asymmetric public key encryption system

a fully decentralized authentication protocol
implemented within privacy-preserving
self-adaptive model

a lightweight entity authentication scheme
outsourcing the task of witness update and using
dynamic accumulator for credential revocation

Remarks

. Scalable, lightweight, and robust scheme
. Requiring less resources and smaller key size

. Less sensitive to user behavior
. Putting user in full control

. Supporting resource restriction of sensors
. Supporting heterogeneity of entities, due to

implicit certificates

. Supporting distributed IoT applications because

of lightweight certificate

2. Safeguarded against certain kinds of attacks

Ne

. Robust against different types of attacks
. Having very low energy, memory, and commu-

nication overhead

. Better than existing RSA and ECC based proto-

cols

. Less times to run, shorter bits and no TTP dur-

ing device setup

. Light computation and communication cost

2. Secure and feasible for applications in IoT

. Less time to authentication for first approach

and better results for second one

. Highly resistance against node compromise,

robust to packet loss, immediate authentication,
and message entropy

. Robust against multiple security attacks
. Having low computation cost

. Less computational and transmission cost,

higher efficiency and stronger security

2. A little larger storage space in the reader

Ne

. Cost-efficient, scalable, and secure
. Enabling user to modify passphrases for any IS

in an uncontrolled manner

. Lightweight, scalable, and reducing the conse-

quence of battery exhaustion attack

. Avoiding replay and MIMA attack

. Not rely on any central organization
. Data collected in anonymous manner

. Solving the main bottleneck of anonymous cre-

dentials

. Efficient for resource-constrained IoT devices

data modification attacks (main type of data tampering attack), which
disrupt the state of the applications, cause widespread damage. To
detect these attacks, Aman et al. (2018) propose a detection mecha-
nism using a random time hopping sequence and random permutations
to hide validation information.

Another type of attacks targeting data integrity is data injection (or
deception attack) where the tampered data is injected in the communi-
cation channel. To identify such an attack, Battisti et al. (2018) design a
secure mechanism based on coding the output of the system using per-
mutation matrices created by flipping. Further approaches to integrity
protection are demonstrated in Table 21. Apart from the attack type,
the level of data integrity can be scored based on the manipulation
level of adversary (Bhattacharjee et al., 2017) or the data can be signed
by elliptic curve based algorithms to provide end-to-end integrity pro-
tection (Bauer et al., 2016).

Availability: The availability of IoT systems can be threatened by
cyber attacks such as impersonations or DoS. Thus, it is essential to
investigate the effect of successful attacks on the availability factor of
the IoT system. Given this concern, Kolisnyk et al. (2017) analyze the
possible types of attacks and mathematically assess the availability fac-

19

tors on smart business. Once the availability level has been measured,
the availability of smart devices should be enhanced to improve their
performance along with their security. Table 22 demonstrates several
approaches to improve (Xiong et al., 2019), optimize (Yang and Kim,
2019), and ensure (Qaim and. Ozkasap, 2018) data availability on IoT
infrastructure.

Non-repudiation: In industrial IoT with a_ service-provisioning
scheme, malicious services might be provided by untrusted service
providers. Similarly, acquirement of correct services might be repu-
diated by dishonest service users for their own advantages or disrup-
tion purposes. To avoid these problems, non-repudiation mechanisms
whether with or without TTP should be presented. However, both of
these two approaches are insufficient for IoT systems due to being
decentralized and having recourse-constrained devices. Given this con-
cern, a non-repudiation model is proposed by (Xu et al., 2019) for
service-provisioning scenarios using blockchain technology. The non-
repudiation issue can also be addressed along with other security
requirements such as authentication and confidentiality to provide a
security service. FSS (Abbas et al., 2019) is an example for these kind
of services given in Table 23.
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Table 19
Access control during MoL in IoT.

Scheme

Mahalle et al. (2013)
Mahalle et al. (2012a)

Ramos et al. (2013)
Zhang and Gong (2011)
Gusmeroli et al. (2013)

Mahalle et al. (2012b)

Anggorojati et al. (2012)
Liu et al. (2012)
Bouanani et al. (2019)
Riad and Zhu (2017)
Hasiba et al. (2018)

Huang et al. (2018)

Kolluru et al. (2018)
Hwang et al. (2018)

Moreno-Sanchez et al. (2013)
Pal et al. (2019)

Salonikias et al. (2019)

Ding et al. (2019)

Table 20
Confidentiality during MoL in IoT.
Scheme

Purohit et al. (2017)

Al-Turjman and Alturjman (2018)
Khalaf and Mohammed (2018)
Eugster et al. (2019)

Hurrah et al. (2019)

Table 21
Integrity during MoL in IoT.

Scheme

Aman et al. (2018)
Battisti et al. (2018)

Bauer et al. (2016)
Bhattacharjee et al. (2017)

7.2. Updates

Under some circumstances, IoT devices and their secret belongings

(i.e., secret keys and certificates)

Method

Capability-based approach
Capability-based approach

Distributed Capability-based
Usage Control (UCON) model

Capability-based

Capability-based

capability-based and context-aware access
control (CCAAC)

Role-Based Access Control (RBAC-based)
approach

pervasive-based access control method
(PerBAC)

Trust-Based Access Control (TB-AC)

Hybrid model, combining RBAC with
ABAC

delegation mechanism based on
hierarchical attribute-based encryption
(HABE)

Next Generation Access Control
(NGAC-based) solution, one kind of ABAC
block-chain (dynamic) based access
control

network access control implementation
Policy-based approach

an access control architecture for IloT
ABAC-based

Method

confidentiality and authentication

agile confidential framework
Confidentiality and Integrity

STYX architecture, providing
confidentiality against an adversary
having full access to servers

RCSMMA, a robust data hiding framework
providing data confidentiality during
transmission for multimedia analytic

Method

data tampering detection

a secure control system to identify
deception attack

end-to-end integrity protection
Bayesian inference framework for data
integrity scoring

are required to be updated.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Remarks

compatible with underline access technologies like Bluetooth, 4G, WiMax and Wi-Fi
using Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDH) to establish shared secret keys between
two devices (not providing details on the communication technologies employed,
based on central entity)

cryptographic solution

based on fuzzy theory and some central entities which manage usage control
decisions and trust values of devices and services

based on a central Policy Decision Point (PDP) which handles authorization
decisions

exchanging capabilities in conjunction with a SHA-1 message digest, which is used
to check the tampering and forgery of the capabilities (not providing details on the
communication technologies employed)

authorizing a delegation request from a delegator (central entity)

using the thing’s particular role(s) and application(s)

presenting a multi-layer and proactive method based on ABAC with additional
features from OrBAC

using user trust level to modify his assigned permissions, based on 3 factors
(multi-factor); not loT oriented

solving the problem of context-awareness while avoiding explosion in the number of
roles or rules in the security policy

outsourcing several effortful operations to cloud server and gateway

achieving fine-grain service level access control between IoT devices

increasing scalability and usability by generating policies on access permissions
even after requesting data

carrying authentication for network access based on PANA protocol

using attributes, roles, and capabilities to provide a hybrid approach

based on virtualization technologies

using blockchain to record the distribution of attributes in order to avoid single
point failure and data tampering

Remarks

securing the IoT communication

using ECC for collecting the sensed data to enable confidentiality and integrity
by encrypting all data that sensors send to IoT server

no burden for the programmer using Partially Homomorphic Encryption (PHE) to
perform computations over encrypted data

using random block and coefficient selection approach to improve robustness of
embedded data

Remarks

by reducing the computational complexity as well reducing the transmission energy
encoding the system output based on a secret pattern created by Fibonacci
p-sequences

using elliptic curve based signatures

under opportunistic data manipulation by an adversary

7.2.1. Key/Certificate update

All keys associated with a specified user or device should be updated
to guarantee forward and backward secrecy, when devices or users join
and leave the system. To efficiently handle key updates (or re-keying)
during membership change inside user or device groups, a Group Key
Management (GKM) scheme was proposed in (Kung and Hsiao, 2018)

20
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Table 22
Availability during MoL in IoT.

Scheme Method

Kolisnyk et al. (2017) a mathematical model to assess
availability

a middleware layer framework
PADGC, a privacy and availability data

clustering scheme

Tsai et al. (2018)
Xiong et al. (2019)

Yang and Kim (2019)
Qaim and. Ozkasap (2018)

high availability architecture

DRAW, a fully distributed hop-by-hop
data replication technique
performance analysis of services
availability and interoperability

a cost-efficient availability preserving
scheme over cloud

Kryvinska and Strauss (2013)

Dinh and Kim (2018)

Table 23
Non-repudiation during MoL in IoT.

Scheme Method

Xu et al. (2019) blockchain-based non-repudiation service

provisioning scheme

Abbas et al. (2019) FSS, a novel fog security service

which combines two existing GKMs, one used within user and device
groups and another for communicating with multiple user groups. Addi-
tionally, a group authentication scheme is proposed by Mahalle et al.
(2014) for an IoT system for verifying the authenticity of all the devices
which take part in the group communication. This scheme has five mod-
ules including a key update which generates a public/private key pair
for Group Authority (GA) and changes the private keys of other mem-
bers of the group. On the other hand, certificates which specify the
public key to owners also require periodic renewal, e.g., by a dynamic
public key certificate (Chien, 2018). More re-keying approaches, as part
of key management (Abdmeziem et al., 2015) or as a separate solution
(Arif et al., 2019) are demonstrated in Table 24.

7.2.2. Software update

The IoT environment consists of various hardware modules includ-
ing their own firmware in each module which should be up-to-date dur-
ing the IoT device lifecycle (Sulkamo, 2018) since IoT devices are not
secured by design (Boudguiga et al., 2017). On the other hand, vendors
do not deliver software updates before attackers exploit a vulnerability
found by a good node. This is the main reason for device failures in the
network, as Beresford (2016) reports. Therefore, it is essential to keep
track of disclosed vulnerabilities and patch them in subsequent software
or firmware updates so that hackers will be unable to enroll them into
botnets.

Table 24
Key/Certificate update during MoL in IoT.

Scheme Method

Kung and Hsiao (2018) GroupIT, a two-tier GKM

Mahalle et al. (2014) key update as part of threshold
cryptography-based group authentication
Chien (2018) DPKC, a dynamic public key certificate
Abdmeziem et al. (2015) re-keying as part of decentralized and
batch-based group key management
protocol

re-keying by LT-SMM, a logical tree-based
secure mobility management scheme

Arif et al. (2019)

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Remarks

by considering the influence of different kinds of DDoS attacks on availability factor

to enhance availability by filtering and integrating the vast amounts of information
based on k-means algorithm and differential privacy, improving the selection of the
initial center points and the distance calculation method from other points to center
point

dynamically optimizing the availability according to various features of service
ensuring maximum data availability under high node failures to preserve data

providing an effective service delivery to attach IoT-enabled enterprise’s customers
more tightly

augmenting the availability of service function chaining (SFC) by evaluating the
improvement potential of VNFs for VNF redundancy allocation

Remarks

using tamper-resistant blockchain as service publisher and an evidence recorder

addressing the authentication, confidentiality, and non-repudiation for IoT devices
via Private Key Generator (PKG) at fog layer

Many IoT devices like modern vehicles require firmware updates
due to their vulnerabilities and outdated configuration settings. Provid-
ing such an update may highlight new issues for constrained devices
(JAB). The update can occur during or after the end-of-life of a device.
It can also occur on the device or on the cloud but both solutions are
challenging. IoT resource-constrained devices cannot rely only on their
limited resources. Obtaining updates from the cloud also makes these
devices perform heavy operations (Chiang and Zhang, 2016). As a con-
sequence, a new solution is needed to distribute the update responsi-
bility among the IoT devices. As an example (Boudguiga et al., 2017),
proposes a peer-to-peer mechanism for spreading updates between IoT
devices. They apply blockchain infrastructure to improve the security of
updates with the focus on availability. More approaches are described
in Table 25.

7.3. Reconfiguration

The security solutions for the various problems in the Reconfigura-
tion phase are discussed in this section.

7.3.1. Application reconfiguration

Similarly to sensor networks, flexibility is a key issue of applica-
tion in IoT systems. Application reconfiguration is the main approach
for improving the flexibility of the system. Such an approach presents

Remarks

grouping similar devices and managing keys between groups through upper tiers
(users) and inside group through lower tiers
generating key pairs for GA and updating private keys of others

updating public/private key pair without connecting to CA for a new certificate,
verifier can use the original CA-issued certificate to verify the claimed public keys
reducing re-keying overhead triggered by membership changes and providing
forward and backward secrecy for multicast communications

providing secure group communication employing group deployment, mobile node
joining and mobile node migration protocols

21
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Table 25
Software update in IoT.

Scheme Method

Boudguiga et al. (2017)
Huth et al. (2016)

peer-to-peer update mechanism

a security protocol for a secure software
update on malicious devices integrating
different trust establishing techniques
Kim et al. (2018) remote software update
Kolomvatsos (2018) distributed updates management scheme
enhancing the autonomous nature of
nodes

Weifsbach etal., 2016 dynamic software update

Table 26
Application reconfiguration in IoT.

Scheme Method

Zhang et al. (2005) EAAR, an environment adaptive
application reconfiguration in WSN
Dynamic Partial Reconfiguration

(DPR)-enabled system

Samir et al. (2019)

a powerful mechanism to adapt component-based distributed applica-
tions in the dynamic environment. However, implementing applica-
tion reconfiguration in IoT is challenging since identically with sen-
sor nodes, memory-constrained devices in IoT are unable to store all
possible applications in their local memories. An example of executing
application reconfiguration in sensor networks is proposed by Zhang et
al. (2005) (see Table 26). This approach is unapplicable in IoT systems
since it does not support the dynamic addition of new knowledge.

Recently, IoT hardware reconfiguration has also become a popular
since IoT applications are often constrained by the dual requirements
of high performance and resource limitation (Johnson et al., 2017).
For instance, energy-limited IoT applications confront the challenge
of trade-off between security strength and power budget. To resolve
the power constraint issue in low-power IoT applications, Samir et
al. (2019) propose Dynamic Partial Reconfiguration (DPR) technology,
where multiple encryption modes can be implemented with various
security levels. Adversary can exploit remote DPR capability of the
devices to launch hardware-related attacks on commonly used secu-
rity applications. Johnson et al. (2017) demonstrate four examples of
remotely-launched attacks on remote DPR, where a bitstream is trans-
ferred remotely over the network to reconfigure one or more applica-
tions embedded on the reconfigurable device.

7.4. Corporability

7.4.1. Mobile security

IoT will potentially connect billions of devices from multiple organi-
zations and in some environment, e.g., smart cities, these devices move
from one cluster to another. When the device moves, organizations will
face many concerns regarding security requirements for the network
and the device itself. The IoT network requires identity checks for the
mobile device when it enters the network. The IoT mobile device, on
the other hand, requires a transparent identification so that it can com-
fortably interact with other mobile nodes, while enjoying the secure
service. For instance, when a car arrives in Helsinki, the security con-
cerns are associated with e.g. its access to city information, the access
rights of other devices in Helsinki to the information related to the new
car, and the trust level of new car.

For providing privacy protection and rapid identification authen-
tication for a mobile node joining the new cluster, Miao and Wang
(2012) present a cryptography-based protocol from the class of single-
step protocol. The protocol rapidly implements authentication using a

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Remarks

using blockchain to ensure updates availability
integrating physically unclonable functions, software-based attestation, and proof of
secure erasure

using low-power wide area network (LPWAN) as a long-range IoT networking
technology and a mobile edge cloud to improve computing efficiency
nodes autonomously deciding the time for the update process activation

coordinating the update of multiple distributed nodes involved in a running service

22

Remarks

utilizing rule-based knowledge to analyze the change of environment to efficiently
perform self-adaptive application reconfiguration
configuring the hardware security module based on the available power budget

valid request message and an answer authentication message.

Since device mobility is increasing in IoT applications making it dif-
ficult to communicate with them directly using their IP address (e.g.,
due to access restrictions or the presence of NAT), the messaging stan-
dards are designed for providing standardized and generic application-
level interfaces to achieve two-way communication among other things
(Kubler et al., 2015b).

The mobile solution was attracted by several IoT services such
as secure healthcare service. For these mobile platforms, deploying a
security architecture is necessary. For this purpose, Goncalves et al.
(Goncalves et al., 2013) define a basic security architecture to support
secured and authenticated interactions, enabling an easy deployment
of m-health applications. Adopting mobile solutions in the same IoT
environment, a novel security and privacy mechanism was proposed
in (Kai et al., 2013) for protecting the patients’ security and privacy
in a healthcare context including trustworthiness, authentication, and
cryptography credentials.

Mobile devices force the environments to integrate with the wireless
network, where wireless access to networks represents security threats.
Thus, an efficient and secure mobile-IPS (m-IPS) is presented in (Jeong
et al., 2014) for business activities for human-centric computing which
utilize mobile devices in mobile environments.

Mobility of low-level technologies such as mobile radio frequency
identification (RFID) technology, used in electronic product code (EPC)
information service, also causes security and privacy concerns for tags
and readers. To protect the mobile RFID (or mobile reader) systems,
security and privacy protection schemes were presented in (Zhu et al.,
2012), (Yan and Wen, 2010), and (Niu et al., 2014) (see Table 27).

7.4.2. End-to-end security

To enable safe end-to-end corporability, an end-to-end security solu-
tion is required relying on protection measures implemented on the
terminal hosts (Sahraoui and Bilami, 2015). As a solution for end-to-
end security, establishing interoperable network security between end
peers, various conventional end-to-end security protocols have been
recently proposed (Moosavi et al., 2016). An end-to-end security proto-
col safeguards the message payload from the data source until reaching
the target. This type of protocol is usually implemented in the network
or application layer with different levels of protection compared to the
link layer, since end-to-end security is not provided by lower layer secu-
rity protocols (Kothmayr et al., 2012).
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Table 27
Mobile security in IoT.

Scheme Method

Miao and Wang (2012) a rapid identification authentication
protocol for mobile nodes joining a new
cluster

a secure and scalable mobility
management scheme

security architecture for mobile platforms

Jara et al. (2013)
Goncalves et al. (2013)
Kubler et al. (2015b) Quantum Lifecycle Management (QLM)
messaging standard

Kai et al. (2013) Health-IoT, a secure healthcare service
Jeong et al. (2014) m-IPS, a mobile intrusion prevention
system

SPMMRFID-IOT, a security and privacy
model for mobile RFID systems

mobile RFID network architecture

a novel ultra-lightweight and
privacy-preserving authentication
protocol for mobile RFID

Zhu et al. (2012)

Yan and Wen (2010)
Niu et al. (2014)

Table 28
End-to-end security in IoT.

Scheme Method

Banerjee et al. (2018) protocol extension for DTLS

Brachmann et al. (2012a)
Hummen et al. (2013a)

end-to-end transport security
lightweight protocol extensions for HIP
DEX during handshake

Sahraoui and Bilami (2015) CD-HIP, Compressed and Distributed HIP
for lightweight end-to-end security
end-to-end security scheme for mobility
enabled healthcare

biometrics-based secure communication

Moosavi et al. (2016)

Hossain et al. (2016)

Several studies have been conducted of IoT end-to-end security pro-
tocols. Among them, some research presented a lightweight IP security
protocol for end-to-end security in IoT such as minimal IKEv2 (IPsec)
(Kivinen, 2012), HIP HIP Diet Exchange (DEX) (Moskowitz and Hum-
men, 2012) and Datagram TLS (DTLS) (Rescorla and Modadugu, 2012).
To improve the applicability of these protocols, recent research shifted
its focus to proposing a new end-to-end protocol by adding an extension
to previous protocols. For instance, due to computational costs of DTLS,
Banerjee et al. (2018) and Brachmann et al. (2012a) contribute to DTLS
and make it a practical solution for implementing end-to-end secu-
rity on resource-constrained IoT devices. For boosting HIP-based pro-
tocols in IoT, some lightweight protocol extensions were proposed by
(Hummen et al., 2013a) and (Sahraoui and Bilami, 2015). Table 28 dis-
cusses these security protocols in more detail, similarly to other end-to-
end security solutions, in particular platforms such as mobility enabled
healthcare (Moosavi et al., 2016) and biometrics-based communication
(Hossain et al., 2016).

8. Security solutions in end of life (EoL)

A device reaches the end of its life due to obsolescence or when
transferring to a new owner.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Remarks

resisting replay attack, eavesdropping attack, and tracking or location privacy
attack.

supporting scalable inter-domain authentication and secure location update and
binding transfer for the mobility process

establishing and managing a medication prescription service in mobility context
using electronic Personal Health Records

enabling real-time communications and two-way communications with nodes
located behind firewall/NAT systems

establishing a trust loT application market (IAM) by exchanging the feature of
application in marketplace and behavior of applications on end-devices
Providing precise access control by checking users’ temporal spatial information,
profiles, and role information

supporting the privacy of tags and readers, tag corruption, reader corruption,
multiple readers, and mutual authenticated key exchange (AKE) protocols
embedding the reader into mobile phone, no need for proxy

using only bitwise XOR and several special constructed pseudo-random number
generators, providing privacy properties (e.g., tag anonymity, tag location privacy,
reader privacy, mutual authentication) and resisting attacks (e.g., replay attacks,
de-synchronization attacks)

Remarks

through the design of reconfigurable energy efficient cryptographic accelerators and
a dedicated protocol controller

by proposing a mapping between TLS and DTLS in homogeneous networks
proposing a comprehensive session resumption mechanism to reduce handshake
costs, a collaborative puzzle-based DoS protection mechanism for network
heterogeneity, and a refined retransmission mechanism for processing time
combination of an efficient distribution scheme for key exchange and an optimal
6LOWPAN model for protocol header

providing a secure and efficient end-user authentication and authorization, secure
end-to-end communication, and robust mobility

using biometrics and pairing-based cryptography for end-to-end security between
different layers

8.1. Re-ownership

One of the fundamental problems in IoT is Ownership management.
This problem triggers several security concerns, including access con-
trol of smart devices after ownership transfer, privacy preservation, and
secret update. Devices in the context of IoT require an ownership which
can be obtained, verified and transferred through a vast communica-
tions network in a fast and secure way (Leng et al., 2014). When a
new owner purchases the device, the ownership should be transferred
from the current owner, a process known as ownership transfer or re-
ownership. Both parties involved in device re-ownership must be pro-
tected as they are both potential adversaries (Khan et al., 2018b). Once
the ownership is transferred, all the rights available to the previous
owner should be assigned to a new owner who should be unable to
trace back previous owner’s communication with others. Meanwhile,
when the ownership of the old owner is revoked, the old owner should
be unable to track any current communication of the new user (Aghili
et al., 2019).

8.1.1. Key/Certificate update
If the device is transferred, a new set of initial secret keys will be
needed by the new owner to access its device servers in BoL. Privacy

23
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Table 29
Key/Certificate update during EoL in IoT.

Scheme Method

Leng et al. (2014) an outline of an ownership management
system

OTP-IoT, a secure RFID ownership
transfer protocol

decentralized re-ownership scheme
LACO, a lightweight authentication and
ownership transfer protocol

chownloT, automated re-ownership of

devices

Mamun et al. (2018)

Ghuli et al. (2017)
Aghili et al. (2019)

Khan et al. (2018b)

Table 30
Key/Certificate revocation in IoT.

Scheme Method

Raza et al. (2016) key revocation as part of key management
architecture

key revocation and re-keying for Adaptive
Key Establishment Scheme (AKES)

a distributed CRL management scheme by
utilizing distributed hash trees

two novel lightweight CRL protocols

Bock et al. (2019)
Cebe and Akkaya (2019)

Duan et al. (2018)

leakage of the device (e.g., secret keys) is the main privacy issue in an
ownership transfer protocol during the ownership transfer process from
the current owner to a new owner. Re-ownership can be managed by a
trusted party to simplify the operations or without trusted party when
complex architectures are unfeasible.

One example of ownership management based on a Trusted Third
Party (TTP) structure is proposed by Leng et al. (2014), in which TTP
handles both ownership establishment and ownership transfer steps
(see Table 29). Although relying on TTP can guarantee the owner’s
privacy, it excessively burdens the trusted server. To solve the prob-
lem, a number of intermediate servers called semi-trusted parties (STP)
is proposed to securely transfer the ownership of RFID tag (Mamun et
al., 2018). By employing STP, during re-ownership process, tag owners
only require communication to a nearest STP instead of interacting with
the main server. This re-ownership method supports forward privacy
secrecy because of updating the session key after each transaction, thus
the new reader is unable to interpret the tag’s previous transactions
and the current reader is also unable to trace the tag. One approach
to removing involvement of the third party in device re-ownership is to
exploit blockchain technology so that the transfer of one user to another
user is managed like a normal blockchain transaction, where the owner
controls the ownership of the device, and can independently transfer it
to any other user (Ghuli et al., 2017). Another solution is to automati-
cally secure ownership changes. Khan et al. (2018b) adopt this type of
solution to address privacy issues related to ownership of smart home
devices in a system called chownloT. This system automatically detects
the ownership change using the context of IoT devices, manages the
profile for authenticating owners, and encrypts the data and isolates
the profile for owner privacy.

Furthermore, in order to transfer the ownership of information in
e-health systems, a situation where accessibility to patient information
can be revoked from one doctor and transferred to another, an owner-
ship transfer phase is proposed in the LACO scheme (Aghili et al., 2019).
In the ownership transfer phase, the server uses the identity and pass-
word of the new owner to update the HACO string (i.e., owner identity,
some dynamic and static attributes about owner’s situation and owner
password) and encrypts it with the new owner key and sends it to the
new owner, thus the old owner cannot decrypt the string.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Remarks

handling ownership transfer through TTP checking the ownership proof and validity
of ownership transfer

preventing MITM attack and supporting mutual authentication while enabling
owners to transfer the ownership of multiple tags simultaneously

using blockchain transactions to reduce the dependency on a central cloud
preserving the user privacy by considering ownership transfer of users

combining authentication, profile management, data protection, and ownership
change

Remarks

marking the key as used in the sliding window to induce it unusable

not routing messages via evicted nodes in Node Revocation List (NRL)

providing less overhead with reasonable access time regardless of network size

based on generalized Merkle hash tree and Bloom filter

24

8.2. Decommissioned

As more devices are being added to our life, the issue of devices that
stop functioning and are decommissioned is growing. Decommissioning
occurs at the end of one of two cycles: duty cycle or usefulness cycle
(Grebler, 2017). The first one might terminate before ending the useful-
ness of the device. However, the latter, also known as death by old age,
terminates when its service stops being useful or becomes boring for the
owner/user after which devices stop being used and become unplugged.
When the device is removed from the domain (decommissioning), some
security services/functionalities should be managed by the server. Such
services consist of deleting device-sensitive user data and state, includ-
ing crypto-keying material, and passwords to resources. At the same
time, the server should remove its own copies of all passwords related
to the device, keying material, and user-related sensitive data (Mietti-
nen et al., 2018).

8.2.1. Key/Certificate revocation

Keys must be revoked if a client is compromised or a service agree-
ment between the client and server is canceled. This can occur by means
of a key revocation message, which the trust anchor sends to the server,
as part of the key management scheme (Raza et al., 2016) or as a com-
plement to the existing key management (Bock et al., 2019). Similarly,
for certificates a long validity period is an immense threat if the IoT
device be compromised. Thus, Kim et al. (2016) define a validity period
for certificates based on risk factors (e.g., public devices have the lowest
period) and after expiration of validity, the certificate will be revoked
or updated. When a certificate is revoked, its serial number and revo-
cation date can be stored in Certificate Revocation List (CRL), which is
a common method for managing certificate revocation. During commu-
nication, one can determine the validity or status of the certificate by
verifying whether it is or in CRL or not. Table 30 demonstrates some
models for managing the CRL.

9. IoT and related technologies

Data processing on IoT device can be considered same as edge com-
puting where the data is processed on the device itself with no data
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

transferring to other sources. Cloud and fog are other technologies
related to IoT with outsourced data processing. Cloud computing is
considered a trusted platform to deliver IoT services (Zarpelao et al.,
2017). However, due to several challenges in cloud computing, such as
the fast increment in a large number of IoT devices, the novel concept
of fog computing has been proposed. Fog computing is a platform to
decentralize the cloud and bring the services closer to the end system
(Dizdarevic et al., 2019).

9.1. Cybersecurity in fog and cloud

Fog and cloud have their exclusive security solutions. For instance,
to detect DDos attacks in cloud systems, Wahab et al. (2020) propose
an optimal load distribution solution. Another cloud-based detection
and defense strategy against multiple types of attacks is presented in
(Wahab et al., 2019). More security mechanisms in various paradigms,
such as fog computing, mobile edge computing, and mobile cloud com-
puting are analyzed by Roman et al. (2018). Such security countermea-
sures seem to be applicable in the IoT platform but it is impossible to
apply them directly, due to IoT features consisting of the constraint
computing power of IoT devices, a large number of connected devices,
and data sharing among users and devices (Zarpelao et al., 2017).

9.2. Fog and IoT security

Fog relation with IoT security is two-fold. On one hand, fog can trig-
ger new security challenges, dissimilar to cloud where cloud infrastruc-
tures are already protected by cloud operators from various attacks. Dis-
tributed inherent feature of fog induces it more vulnerable to attacks.
Some fog systems are so small that they might not be resourceful the
same as cloud to implement a proper protection mechanism or intel-
ligence for detecting threats (Chiang and Zhang, 2016). Since fog was
originally introduced to present new applications and services to the IoT
environment, several security problems in this area have been solved
already. Diro et al. (2017) employ a cryptography method, ECC, to
present a secure fog-based publish-subscribe lightweight protocol for
IoT. A cybersecurity framework in fog and cloud environment is pre-
sented in (Sohal et al., 2018) to identify malicious edge (or IoT) devices.
For this purpose, they apply a combination of three common technolo-
gies consisting of Markov model, Intrusion Detection System (IDS), and
Virtual Honeypot Device (VHD).

On the other hand, fog can address security challenges, due to its
locality on the edge and proximity to the end system. For example, fog
as a security layer between IoT device and cloud overcomes man-in-the-
middle attack (MIMA) since abnormal activities can be identified and
reduced through this layer before reaching the system (Hassija et al.,
2019). Security features over fog, in general, can have higher impact
on IoT networks rather than cloud. Possible impact of various security
considerations such as access control, authentication, and CIA when
fog computing is compromised is analyzed in (Butun et al., 2019). For
instance, although fog computing acts as a gateway between IoT devices
and cloud, it is impossible to access the databases of cloud from fog
gateway, however, fog gateway is able to conquer the IoT devices. Thus,
a compromised fog gateway trigger higher level of risk on IoT network
compared to cloud.

10. Discussion

Overall, as a comparison of all the security techniques introduced in
previous sections, Table 31 presents the security solutions according to
the stage and phase of lifecycle where the related issues are resolved.
The pseudonym for each security solution or the generally known name
for the solution, if there is no pseudonym is mentioned as Method in the

25

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

table. The relevant domains, including the smart environment, applica-
tion, and sensor type, which are targeted by such security solution, are
discussed in the table as Domain. Among the extracted domain, smart
home and WSN attracted more attention for security analysis and imple-
mentation.

The study demonstrates that amongst security issues, security
requirements in the deployment phase of BoL and application recon-
figuration during the operation phase are in lower priority to be ana-
lyzed and tackled. Moreover, non-repudiation as an important secu-
rity requirement, whether in BoL or MoL, offers insufficient contribu-
tion. Further, key pairing as part of key management has recently been
regarded as less attractive by the researchers, still requiring more inves-
tigation. As an advantage of such a study, a solution is available for all
the security problems in various network layers (i.e., physical layer, link
layer, and so on) but with the exception of one paper, none of them fol-
low the device lifecycle in their method definition and implementation.
However, a security solution is efficient for IoT systems only if it can
be technically secure throughout the entire device lifecycle not only
during installation or operation.

The following abbreviations have been introduced here from the
“Solution” column of discussion table if they are not the method name.
These are being abbreviated in the discussion table to increase its read-
ability and give more clarity to the compared approaches. KMP: Key
Management Protocol; PRW: Position Random Watermark; CB: Context-
based; MEMS: Microelectromechanical Systems; LoF: Local Outlier Fac-
tor; TM: Trust Management; PP: Privacy Preserving; PPDM: Privacy Pre-
serving Data Mining; CoT: cloud of Things; PUFs: Physically Unclonable
Functions; AWMA: Asymmetric Weighted Moving Average; VNF: vir-
tual Network Functions; ANN: Artificial Neural Network; AAL: Ambient
Assisted Living; HIP: Host Identity Protocol; DTLS: Datagram Transport
Layer Security; ML: machine learning;

11. Open issues

The previously analyzed security aspects in IoT with respect to prod-
uct lifecycle, raise challenges and opportunities for further research.
This section discusses the major research directions required for
addressing the unique IoT challenges (Bertin et al., 2019).

1. Resolving identities of IoT devices: The attribute based access
control concerns with the device identity issues. Hence, the attribute
combination for assertion of requester authenticity, i.e., manufac-
turer, owner or current location can be used. Nevertheless, user
identification for the device is still questionable.

2. Dynamic AC policies: A privacy policy must specify who interacts
with what data, where, how, and when. Easy-to-understand policies
need to be built that are dynamic according to the IoT context with
increased data flow combinations in IoT applications.

3. Openness: The basic IoT requirement is that the solutions provided
by the third parties and various industry partners should be integral.
Such openness can be provided by the use of open standards, which
can be used for all IoT devices. Industry partners should be able
to integrate such open standards for their devices to enable cross
platform integration of applications.

4. Heterogeneity: New objects are deployed which need backward
compatibility to integrate with the already deployed old objects.
Hence, new AC protocols will be required to ensure this.

5. Personal data: Extensive personal data are generated by IoT sys-
tems, with end users taking charge of them. The conflicting interests
of users need to be managed by IoT systems.

6. Scalability: As IoT systems escalate, they should be able to handle
large user groups, applications, decision points and policy enforce-
ment.
9G

Table 31

Classification of security issues of IoT devices based on their lifecycle.

Lifecycle
stage

BoL

BoL

BoL

BoL

BoL
BoL
BoL
BoL
BoL
BoL
BoL
BoL
BoL
BoL
BoL

BoL

Lifecycle phase

Manufactured

Manufactured

Manufactured

Manufactured

Manufactured
Manufactured
Manufactured
Manufactured
Deployment
Deployment
Deployment
Deployment
Deployment
Deployment
Deployment

Deployment

Citation & year

Sciancalepore et al.
(2015)

Hanel et al. (2017)

Won et al. (2018)

Garcia-Magarifo et al.
(2019)

Babar et al. (2011)

Xu et al. (2014) (Xu et
al., 2014b)

Pecorella et al. (2016)
Ali and Awad (2018)
Miettinen et al. (2014)
(Miettinen et al., 2014a)
Sciancalepore et al.
(2015)

Tsai et al. (2017)
Samtani et al. (2016)
Alghamdi et al. (2018)
Wang et al. (2018)

Costa et al. (2019)

Alrawi et al. (2019)

Security issue

Certificate
installation

Certificate
installation

Certificate
installation
Certificate
installation

Physical security
Physical security
Physical security
Physical security
Key pairing
Key pairing
Key pairing

Vulnerability
management
Vulnerability
management
Vulnerability
management
Vulnerability
management
Vulnerability
management

Solution

preloading certificates in each
device by the network
administrator before the
deployment of the network
adjustable security system

distributed and secure PKI

digital certificate for
authentication

embedded security framework
Computer-aided design

security framework for the device
initialization
risk assessment approach

zero-interaction pairing
robust key negotiation

key establishment scheme by
Kronecker

active and passive vulnerability
assessment

automated tool for vulnerability
assessment

vulnerability assessment and
quantification method
identification of high-risk
vulnerabilities

a modeling methodology

Method

KMP

ASREID

IoT-PKI

CAD

OCTAVE Allegro

CB

KMP

KMP

IoTVerif

SoK

Domain

IloT

RFID-equipped
sensor

smart vehicle

in-built security

hardware-based

security
e-health

smart home
wearable
devices

IloT

WSN

critical
infrastructure
client
applications
IIoT

smart home

smart home

Description

generating ultra-lightweight “implicit” certificates exploiting the
Elliptic Curve Qu-Vanstone (ECQV) technique

reducing the overhead of device pre-equipping of security
information by providing various selection for pre-installed
certificates

assigning the role of CAs to distributed blockchain nodes

requesting a digital certificate from certifier, checking the vehicle
by certified accreditation center, and incorporating private key to
the vehicle

providing a dynamic prevention, detection, diagnosis, isolation,
and countermeasures against breaches

using hardware-based security approaches to be more resilient
against side-channel and physical attacks

providing a secure and error proof configuration for cryptographic
keys of devices

identifying security threats and the potential risks emanating from
inside and outside of environment

identifying the correct device based on sustained co-presence over
time by computing a fingerprint of the ambient context

using ECDH algorithm to ensure secrecy

computing the pairwise key with no communication while
decreasing the storage cost and computation cost

Identifying a multitude of vulnerabilities on Supervisory Control
and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems

verifying SSI/TLS certificate validation of IoT messaging protocols

Based on attack graph and maximum loss stream; CVSS scale to
quantify and calculate the potential risk of attack path
verifying if a device is vulnerable to the most common
vulnerabilities

understanding attack techniques, proposed mitigation, and
stakeholder responsibilities according to component analysis

(continued on next page)

‘1D J2 poyzaufasnox ‘N

6ZLZ0I (OZ0Z) IZI suonvoyddy saindwoD puv y1omay fo Pousmor
LG

Table 31 (continued)

Lifecycle
stage

BoL

BoL

BoL
BoL

BoL

BoL

BoL

BoL

BoL

BoL

BoL
BoL
BoL
BoL
BoL

BoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

Lifecycle phase

Deployment

Deployment

Deployment
Deployment

Deployment

Deployment

Deployment

Deployment

Deployment

Deployment

Deployment
Deployment
Deployment
Deployment
Deployment

Deployment

Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis

Monitoring &
diagnosis

Citation & year

Attaran and Rashidzadeh
(2016)

Miettinen et al. (2017)
Berelejis et al. (2017)
Corchia et al. (2019)
Neto et al. (2016)
Yousefnezhad et al.

(2017)
Valea et al. (2019)

Zhang et al. (2017)
(Zhang et al., 2017b)
Chamarajnagar and
Ashok (2019)

Wu et al. (2019)
Mustafa et al. (2019)
Oriwoh et al. (2016)
(Fremantle et al., 2014)
Meidan et al. (2017)
Song et al. (2017)

Yousefnezhad et al.
(2018)

Namal et al. (2015)

Chen et al. (2016)

Alexopoulos et al. (2018)

Security issue

Identification

Identification

Identification
Identification

Authentication
& Access control

Authentication

& Access control
Confidentiality

Integrity

Integrity

Availability

Availability
Non-repudiation
Identification
Identification
Identification

Identification

Trust

Trust

Trust

Solution

chipless RFID tags

automated device-Type
identification

device identification with an
image of the device
robust chipless identification tags

Authentication of Things

security model

secure context saving unit, a
hardware module easily
implementable inside a SoC
random digital watermarking
algorithm as data integrity
protection scheme

integrity threat identification
framework

node availability analysis

availability analysis of
service-oriented cloud
resource-constrained
authentication protocol
federated identity and access
management approach

device identification based on
network traffic analysis
improved identity management

measurement-based device
identification framework

autonomic trust management
framework

adaptive and scalable trust
management

distributed trust management
system

Method

MEMS

IOT SENTINEL

encoding

AoT

O-MI

SCSU

PRW

LOF

NBIOT-HWSN

QoS
ReCAP
FIAM
ProfilloT
IIDM

MeDI

MAPE-K

TM

DL-TM

Domain

RFID sensors

smart home

smart home
wearable
electronics
entire lifecycle

smart home

processor-based
devices

WSN
precision
agriculture
NB-IoT

IloT

CPS

Iot protocols
ML-based
5G

smart campus

cloud-based

SOA-based

smart contract

Description

using micro-electromechanical systems technology

identifying the types of devices introduced to a network and
employing mitigation measures for device-types with potential
security vulnerabilities

apturing the image by user device and transmitting the image from
the user device to the IoT device

using two strategies for encoding information in chipless tags

relying on identity-based and attribute-based cryptography to
distribute keys, authenticate devices, and cryptographically enforce
ABAC

defining design and implementation principles for access control
and integrating with O-MI reference implementation

providing confidentiality by stream cipher based encryption and
integrity by MAC derived from the saved context

based on fragile watermark to prevent variety of attacks on
perception layer

detecting from physical attacks on sensor nodes using outlier
detection

by presenting a node heterogeneity model based on node
distribution and vulnerability differences then using epidemic
theory and Markov chain to establish node state transition mode
running experiments on Device-to-cloud, cloud-to-cloud and
inside-cloud

demonstrating the feasibility of achieving non-repudiation

building a prototype using OAuth 2.0 to enable access control to
information distributed via MQTT

using machine learning algorithms to identify IoT device type,
based on characteristics of the network traffic it generates
improving both security and performance by maximizing load
balancing to service provider

monitoring the data packets coming from smart devices to protect
the server from receiving and spreading false data

evaluating trust level by monitoring, analysing, planning,
executing, and presenting knowledge feedback loop

trust evaluation based on feedback employing similarity level of
friendship, social relationship, and community of interest
relationships for filter

utilizing distributed ledger to maintain all access delegations, and
reputation scores of participants in 3 layers: global, group and local
layer

(continued on next page)

‘1D J2 poyzaufasnox ‘N

6ZLZ0I (OZ0Z) IZI suonvoyddy saindwoD puv y1omay fo Pousmor
8%

Table 31 (continued)

Lifecycle
stage

MoL
MoL
MoL
MoL

MoL

 

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

 

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

Lifecycle phase

Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis

 

Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis

 

Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis

Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis

Citation & year

Tariq et al. (2019)
Alshehri and Hussain
(2019)

Ukil et al. (2014)
Ukil et al. (2015)

Boussada et al. (2018)

Jourdan et al. (2018)

Guan et al. (2019)

Raza et al., 2013)
Taneja (2013)

Jia et al. (2017)
Nguyen et al. (2018)
Mahalle et al. (2014)
Porambage et al. (2014)
(Porambage et al.,
2014b)

Fan et al. (2016)

Yang et al. (2016)
Anggorojati et al. (2012)
Riad et al. (2017) (Riad
and Zhu, 2017)

Hasiba et al. (2018)

Bouanani et al. (2019)

Security issue

Trust
Trust
Privacy
Privacy
Privacy

Privacy

Privacy
Compromise
detection
Compromise
detection
Compromise
detection
Compromise
detection
Authentication

Authentication

Authentication
Authentication

Access control

Access control
Access control

Access control

Solution

mobile code-driven trust
mechanism

fuzzy security protocol for
managing trust

privacy measurement and
quantification

dynamic privacy analyzer

privacy-preserving system

privacy-preserving activity
recognition framework

device-oriented Anonymous
Privacy-Preserving scheme
real-time intrusion detection

compromise analysis framework
context-based permission system

self-learning distributed
compromise detection
threshold cryptography-based
group authentication
pervasive lightweight
authentication

lightweight RFID-based mutual
authentication

lightweight anonymous
authentication scheme
capability-based and
context-aware access control
scheme

trust-based access control model

combination of RBAC with ABAC
models

pervasive-based access control
model

Method

MCTM
Fuzzy-IoT
PPDM
DPA
PKE-IBE

PP

APPA
SVELTE
analytical
ContexloT
DioT
TCGA

PAuthKey

LRMAPC
self-blinding

CCAAC

TB-AC
hybrid

PerBAC

Domain

SN-powered
cluster-based
smart meter
smart energy
smart e-health
personal health-
care/wearable
device
fog-enhanced
routing

M2M devices
smartphone
smart home

WiFi devices

WSN

5G

anonymity-
based
Federated IoT

cloud-based
multimodal

applications
smart parking

Description

detecting isolating malicious internal sensor nodes based on their
forwarding behaviors

applying a new security protocol to create a secure communication
and message exchange between devices

enabling the user to assess the risk of sharing his private data

addressing the problem of involuntary privacy breaching risk
minimization by minimizing the capability of privacy intruders
based on Identity-Based Cryptography tackling the key escrow
issue and ensuring blind partial private key generation

limiting the risk of user re-identification by extracting multiple
features from raw signal and analyzing their impact on both the
activity recognition and the user re-identification

using Authentication for data aggregation applications in
fog-enhanced IoT system

safeguarding network from known attacks and adapting existing
IDS to IoT-specific protocols, e.g., 6LoWPAN

detecting compromised IoT devices using mobility behavior

detection of malicious app by discovering sensitive actions
using federated learning for device-type specific anomaly detection

verifying authenticity of all devices in the group communication
using probabilistic asymmetric public key encryption system
establishing secure link between sensors in two phases

using cache on the reader and storing recent visited tags

outsourcing the task of witness update and using dynamic
accumulator for credential revocation
authorizing a delegation request from a delegator (central entity)

using user trust level to modify his assigned permissions, based on
multiple factors

solving the problem of context-awareness while avoiding explosion
in the number of roles or rules in the security policy

presenting a multi-layer and proactive method based on ABAC with
additional features from OrBAC

(continued on next page)

‘1D J2 poyzaufasnox ‘N

6ZLZ0I (OZ0Z) IZI suonvoyddy saindwoD puv y1omay fo Pousmor
6G

Table 31 (continued)

Lifecycle

stage

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

 

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

 

MoL

Lifecycle phase

Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis

 

Monitoring &
diagnosis

Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Monitoring &
diagnosis
Updates

Updates

Citation & year

Al-Turjman and
Alturjman (2018)
Khalaf and Mohammed
(2018)

Eugster et al. (2019)

Hurrah et al. (2019)
Bauer et al. (2016)
Bhattacharjee et al.
(2017)

Aman et al. (2018)
Battisti et al. (2018)
Dinh and Kim (2018)
Qaim and Ozkasap
(2018) (Qaim and.
Ozkasap, 2018)
Xiong et al. (2019)
Yang and Kim (2019)
Abbas et al. (2018)
(Abbas et al., 2019)
(Xu et al., 2019)

Mahalle et al. (2014)

Abdmeziem et al. (2015)

Security issue

Confidentiality
Confidentiality
Confidentiality
Confidentiality
Integrity
Integrity
Integrity
Integrity

Availability

Availability

Availability

Availability

Non-repudiation

Non-repudiation

Key/Certificate
update
Key/Certificate
update

Solution

agile confidential framework
confidentiality and Integrity
services
confidentiality-preserving system
robust data hiding framework
end-to-end integrity protection
Bayesian inference framework
data tampering detection

secure control system
cost-efficient availability scheme
fully distributed hop-by-hop data
replication technique

privacy and availability data
clustering scheme

high availability architecture

fog security service
non-repudiation service
provisioning scheme

key update in group
authentication

decentralized and batch-based
group key management protocol

Method

ECC

AES, RSA
STYX
RCSMMA
ECDSA
AWMA

PUF
permutation

matrix
VNF

DRAW

PADC

VNF

FSS
blockchain-
based

TCGA

DBGK

Domain

WSN

smart home
CoT
multimedia
RERUM project
On-Off attack
cyber attacks
IoT-based CPS

fog-core cloud

WSN

electricity
services
IoT-Cloud

fog computing
IloT

WiFi device

mobile objects

Description

using ECC for collecting the sensed data to enable confidentiality
and integrity
encrypting all data that sensors send to server

providing confidentiality against an adversary having full access to
servers
providing data confidentiality during transmission for analytic

using elliptic curve based signatures

data integrity scoring under opportunistic data manipulation by an
adversary

by reducing the computational complexity as well reducing the
transmission energy

encoding the system output based on a secret pattern created by
Fibonacci p-sequences to identify deception attack

augmenting the availability of service function chaining by
evaluating the improvement potential of VNFs for VNF redundancy
allocation

ensuring maximum data availability under high node failures to
preserve data

improving the selection of the initial center points and the distance
calculation method from other points to center point

dynamically optimizing the availability according to various
features of service

addressing the authentication, confidentiality, and non-repudiation
for IoT devices via Private Key Generator

using tamper-resistant blockchain as service publisher and an
evidence recorder

generating key pairs for group authentication and updating private
keys of others

reducing re-keying overhead triggered by membership changes and
providing forward and backward secrecy for multicast
communications

(continued on next page)

‘1D J2 poyzaufasnox ‘N

6ZLZ0I (OZ0Z) IZI suonvoyddy saindwoD puv y1omay fo Pousmor
0€

Table 31 (continued)

Lifecycle
stage

MoL
MoL
MoL
MoL
MoL

MoL

 

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

MoL

Lifecycle phase

Updates
Updates
Updates
Updates
Updates
Updates

Re-configuration

Re-configuration

Corporability

Corporability
Corporability

Corporability

Corporability

Corporability

Corporability

Corporability

Citation & year

Kung et al. (2018) (Kung
and Hsiao, 2018)

Chien (2018)

Huth et al. (2016)
Weisbach etal., 2016
Kim et al. (2018)

Kolomvatsos (2018)

Zhang et al. (2015)
(Zhang et al., 2005)

Samir et al. (2019)

Zhu et al. (2012)

Jara et al. (2013)
Goncalves et al. (2013)
(Kai et al., 2013)
Hummen et al. (2013)
(Hummen et al., 2013a)

Sahraoui and Bilami
(2015)

Moosavi et al. (2016)

Banerjee et al. (2018)

Security issue

Key/Certificate
update
Key/Certificate
update

Software update
Software update
Software update

Software update

Application
reconfiguration

Application
reconfiguration
Mobile security
Mobile security
Mobile security
Mobile security
End-to-end
security

End-to-end
security

End-to-end
security

End-to-end
security

Solution

lightweight group key
management
dynamic public key certificate

security protocol for a secure
software update
dynamic software update

remote software update

distributed updates management
scheme

environment adaptive application
reconfiguration

dynamic partial reconfiguration

security and privacy model for
mobile RFID systems

secure and scalable mobility
management scheme

security architecture for mobile
platforms

secure healthcare service

lightweight protocol extensions
for HIP DEX during handshake

compressed and distributed HIP
for lightweight end-to-end
security

end-to-end security scheme for
mobility enabled healthcare

protocol extension for DTLS

Method

GroupIT

DPKC

decentralized
LPWAN
ANN

EAAR

AEAD

SPMMRFID-IOT

HIMALIS
AAL

Health-IoT

CD-HIP

SEA

DTLS

Domain

dynamic IoT
WSN

smart home
smart grid
mobile edge
computing
pervasive
computing
WSN

hardware-based

RFID devices

inter-domain
m-health

smart e-health

WSN

smart e-health

hardware-based

Description

grouping similar devices and managing keys between groups
through upper tiers (users) and inside group through lower tiers
updating public/private key pair without connecting to CA for a
new certificate

integrating physically unclonable functions, software-based
attestation, and proof of secure erasure

coordinating the update of multiple distributed nodes involved in a
running service

using low-power wide area network as a long-range networking
technology

enhancing the autonomous nature of nodes by allowing them to
decide about the update time

utilizing rule-based knowledge to analyze the change of
environment to efficiently perform self-adaptive application
reconfiguration

configuring the hardware security module based on the available
power budget

supporting the privacy of tags and readers, tag corruption, reader
corruption, multiple readers, and mutual authenticated key
exchange protocols

supporting scalable inter-domain authentication and secure
location update and binding transfer for the mobility process
establishing and managing a medication prescription service in
mobility context using electronic Personal Health Records
establishing a trust IoT application market (IAM) by exchanging
the feature of application in marketplace and behavior of
applications on end-devices

reducing handshake cost by session resumption, handling network
heterogeneity by puzzle-based DoS protection, and reducing
processing time by refined retransmission

combination of an efficient distribution scheme for key exchange
and an optimal 6LOWPAN model for protocol header

providing a secure and efficient end-user authentication and
authorization, secure end-to-end communication, and robust
mobility

designing of reconfigurable energy efficient cryptographic
accelerators and a dedicated protocol controller

(continued on next page)

‘1D J2 poyzaufasnox ‘N

6ZLZ0I (OZ0Z) IZI suonvoyddy saindwoD puv y1omay fo Pousmor
TE

Table 31 (continued)

Lifecycle
stage

EoL
EoL

EoL

EoL

EoL

EoL
EoL

EoL

EoL

Lifecycle phase

Re-ownership
Re-ownership

Re-ownership

Re-ownership

Re-ownership

De-
commissioned
De-
commissioned
De-
commissioned

De-
commissioned

Citation & year

Leng et al. (2014)

Ghuli et al. (2017)
Mamun et al. (2018)
Khan et al. (2018) (Khan

et al., 2018b)
Aghili et al. (2019)

Raza et al. (2016)
Duan et al. (2018)

Bock et al. (2019)

Cebe and Akkaya (2019)

Security issue

Key/Certificate
update
Key/Certificate
update
Key/Certificate
update

Key/Certificate
update
Key/Certificate
update

key/certificate
revocation
key/certificate
revocation
key/certificate
revocation

key/certificate
revocation

Solution

ownership management system

decentralized re-ownership
scheme

secure RFID ownership transfer
protocol

automated re-ownership of
devices

lightweight authentication and
ownership transfer protocol

key revocation as part of key
management architecture

two novel lightweight CRL
protocols

key revocation and re-keying for
adaptive key establishment
scheme

distributed CRL management
scheme

Method

OTP-IoT

chownloT

LACO

S3K
HCRL, BfCRL

AKES

DHT-based CRL

Domain

cloud-based

RFID tags

smart home

E-health

secure DTLS
PKI-based

link layer
security

smart city

Description

handling ownership transfer through TTP checking the ownership
proof and validity of ownership transfer

using blockchain transactions to reduce the dependency on a
central cloud

preventing MITM attack and supporting mutual authentication
while enabling owners to transfer the ownership of multiple tags
simultaneously

combining authentication, profile management, data protection,
and ownership change

preserving the user privacy by considering ownership transfer of
users

marking the key as used in the sliding window to induce it unusable

based on generalized Merkle hash tree and Bloom filter

not routing messages via evicted nodes in Node Revocation List

utilizing distributed hash trees to provide less overhead with
reasonable access time regardless of network size

‘1D J2 poyzaufasnox ‘N

6ZLZ0I (OZ0Z) IZI suonvoyddy saindwoD puv y1omay fo Pousmor
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Trust Management (TM) is an important consideration enhancing
security in IoT devices, although posing certain challenges in its imple-
mentation at a broader level. The following objectives are rarely con-
sidered in the literature: (Yan et al., 2014):

e Trust Relationship and Decision (TRD): TM should measure the trust
relationships of entities in all layers (physical, network and applica-
tion layer) and help them to make a wise decision for their commu-
nication.

e Data Fusion and Mining Trust (DFMT): TM should process and
analyze data in a trustworthy way (considering reliability, holo-
graphic data process, privacy preserving, and accuracy) in the net-
work layer. It should also mine user demands based on their social
behaviors.

e System Security and Robustness (SSR): TM should counter attacks
in all system layers to apply security and dependability (reliability
and availability)

e Generality (G): TM should be generic for wide use.

e Human-Computer Trust Interaction (HCTI): TM should be easily
acceptable to users in the application layer.

There is no comprehensive TM approach which considers all
objectives of trust. Previous TM approaches (which are not Machine
learning(ML)-based) estimated the trustworthiness of a trustee by its
previous behaviors while this knowledge (e.g., a trust path between
trustor and trustee) may not be available locally to the trustor. So what
should we do if there is no knowledge about past behavior? ML algo-
rithms can be applied to more efficiently estimate agent trustworthi-
ness. MetaTrust (Xin et al., 2011) is an ML framework for identify-
ing trust relying on discriminant analysis (DA), and it controls meta
information using the trustor’s local knowledge. Lopez et al. (Lopez
and Maag, 2015) also apply a supervised ML technique, Support Vector
Machine (SVM) for TM. Tinghuai et al. (a et al., 2005) exploit another
ML method, Case-Based Reasoning (CBR) to achieve a context-aware
technique for smart homes. Miettinen et al. (2014b) use classification
for a context-aware technique for access control. Motti et al. (2012)
motivate the use of ML approaches for context-aware adaptation and
Wang and Ahmad (Wang Ahmadet al, 2010) propose a context-aware
ML framework for Android platform. However, we cannot use these
solutions in the IoT context because of IoT constraints such as existence
of limited power devices and heterogeneous technologies. To address
these challenges, we should use lightweight methods to make these ML
solutions implementable in IoT context. For instance, Che et al. (2015)
propose ML algorithms for producing a lightweight TM. Perhaps, we
could apply this algorithm in IoT for the same purpose. The other open
issues concerning trust management are as follows:

1. Current TM solutions for data perception trust (reliable data sensing
and collection) are too heavy and complicated for wireless sensor
nodes. We therefore need lightweight trust mechanisms suitable for
small entities (Yan et al., 2014).

2. A trust management survey (Yan et al., 2014) defines five crucial
TM objectives for a trustworthy IoT: Trust Relationship and Deci-
sion (TRD), Privacy Protection (PP), System security and robustness
(SSR), Generality (G), Identity Trust (IT). There are few works on
PP. To obtain a TM with vertical objectives, we need to integrate PP
with other TM mechanisms. The PP approach should be applied in
all layers and for resource-restricted devices.

3. Many previous analysis of Secure Multi-Party Computation (SMC)
address the problem of secure computation among untrusted partic-
ipants. Unfortunately, most of them are impractical for IoT due to
computation complexity, communication costs, and flexibility. We
need a new SMC method that supports the vertical TM objectives
(Yan et al., 2014).

4. Transmitting and computing trust between different networks is dif-
ficult (Yan et al., 2014).

32

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

5. TM should work fast and consume less energy. Previous research
neglected power efficiency of TM methods in IoT (Yan et al., 2014).

6. There is no previous work in realizing an automatic TM (Yan et al.,
2014).

7. Since there is a huge amount of raw data created by things in IoT,
it is important to achieve trustworthy data fusion to reduce the cost
(Yan et al., 2014).

8. One important factor influencing trust is context, which includes
purpose of trust, environment of trust, and risk of trust. The cur-
rent TM approaches do not focus on context awareness, so the trust
results are impersonalized. They cannot provide intelligent services
(context-aware services) in the application layer (Yan et al., 2014).
Some examples of context-aware services include a real-time traffic
update or even a live video feed of a planned route for a motor vehi-
cle user (Wikipedia. Context aware). This service is also known as
“Only here, only now and only me”.

9. It is necessary to determine a well-defined and commonly-accepted
trust negotiation language for semantic interoperability of the IoT
context (Sicari et al., 2015).

These can be categorized based on product lifecycle and various
research challenges can be listed. These can be an important consid-
eration for an industry to address while designing and manufacturing
their products. The open issues can be presented in general as shown in
Table 32.

11.1. Research challenges in BoL

1. Vulnerability in resource-constrained devices: The IoT devices
with constrained resources (like edge devices) are particularly sus-
ceptible to attacks. It has been shown by penetration studies that
even though it takes less power to implement of better practice
security for edge nodes, their accessibility to harmful threats still
remains immense.

2. Inter-fog sharing of resources: It is one such domain requiring
further research since when the requests are not processed in the
fog layer because of heavy load, they are forwarded to cloud. The
neighboring fog layers can do resource sharing, thus preventing the
transfer of unwanted requests to cloud.

3. Near real-time data analysis: The near real-time data analysis in
the IoT device proximity is imperative for the successful imple-
mentation of IoT applications. Different machine learning-based
approaches could be designed to analyze the data within the node
and to prevent the transit of data, thus enhancing the application
security.

4. Security at gateway level: The security layer at the gateways is
required between different layers in IoT as they grant an easy access
point to intruders in system. A promising solution is to provide end-
to-end encryption, which will be a big challenge for securing data
through gateways. The decryption of the data should only take place
at the destinations and not at the gateways in the middle of protocol
translation. This further requires unified standards for data transmis-
sion rather than different protocols which may require translations
at the gateways leading to attack vulnerability.

5. Interoperability between protocols: The challenges related to the
development of appropriate security models with context to het-
erogeneity of IoT systems, is an important security consideration.
Indeed, the core design and development principle in IoT relies on
interoperability and its benefits should be remarkable in the secu-
rity domain. In this context, the recent efforts to orchestrate security
approaches for Network function virtualization (NFV) and Software-
defined networking (SDN) environments merit research to form a
basis for enhanced future IoT environments.

6. X.509 certificates validity: Future IoT applications may require
approaches which support online verification of X.509 certificates
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Table 32
The open issues overview and description.

Open Issue Brief description of the cause

Standards
Mobility support
Transport protocol

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

There are several standardization effortss across multiple domains
There are not enough reliable proposals for addressing mobility support in IoT
The connection setup and congestion control mechanisms of existing transport protocols fail in IoT scenarios

as they require high buffering in connected objects.

Traffic characterisation
Quality of Service (QoS) support
Authentication

The data traffic generated by IoT is significantly different from those observed in the internet.
It will be mandatory to define new QoS requirements for IoT
Authentication in IoT requires appropriate authentication infrastructures as things have scarcity of resources

compared to present computing devices. Another problem is man-in-middle attack.

Data Integrity
Privacy

The password lengths supported by IoT devices may be too short to support strong protection level.
The connected devices can collect more private information from a person without its awareness.

Control on such information is hard with current technologies.

Digital Forgetting

particularly for the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) certifi-
cates security mode. Further research is required on adopting these
kind of mechanisms.

. Trade-off between security and energy consumption: The pro-
posed asymmetric cryptographic solutions in IoT are flexible, mak-
ing them efficient with complexity and scalability issues but they
are not energy efficient. These classic asymmetric approaches (RSA,
NTRU, and ECC) are subsequently investigated in several studies.
The major challenge lies in establishing trade-off between secu-
rity and energy consumption to achieve a desirable security level.
The solutions should reduce the energy consumption in resource-
constrained devices, while ensuring an acceptable security level.

. Support of public- keys and digital certificates: The current com-
puting platforms of the sensing platforms pose a constraint on cer-
tificate processing. The certificate overhead problem in constrained
sensing platforms has been addressed in (Hummen et al., 2013b)
by discussing the various design approaches. The certificate pre-
validation and session resumption are the proposed approaches
where certificate pre-validation involves a security gateway to sup-
port certificate validation before handshake message forwarding to
the destination and session resumption. It helps in maintaining min-
imal session state after session breakdown.

. Exponential increase in the number of weak links: As most IoT
devices have limited computation and storage resources, and con-
sidering cost factors, the available devices in market do not support
highly secure cryptography. Hence, it has led to emergence of many
weak links in the network which can easily be compromised by any
attacker to target the entities in the network which are presumed to
be secure. Many studies (Use Smart Doorbell to Ha, 2016) (Hacking
into Internet Co, 2016) demonstrate how edge nodes can be targeted
for extraction of the home user’s WiFi password where one attack
(Use Smart Doorbell to Ha, 2016) uses light bulbs and other (Hack-
ing into Internet Co, 2016) uses user’s smart lock. The diverse nature
of IoT devices and applications amplifies the impact.

11.2. Research challenges in MoL

. Unsecure update process for a medical device: The dosage limit
on medication to be given to the patient was raised by a hacker using
a Hospira drug infusion pump (Scully) in 2015. The main concern
emerged from an insecure library update process and communica-
tion modules for the pumps. The question arises if the updates in the
software or firmware are digitally signed or authenticated.

. Efficient and reliable consensus mechanisms: The current con-
sensus algorithms are less efficient as they are highly resource hun-
gry. Hence there is need to design consensus among the nodes to
prevent rampant consumption of computation power.

33

The person’s collected information can be retained for several years which can be used to retrieve any
information with data mining techniques.

3. Limitations of blockchain architecture: This architecture is lim-

ited in the number of permissioned network nodes and in permis-
sionless network throughput. To support high throughput with an
increase in users or nodes, various consensus algorithms need to be
designed.

. DTLS limitations: Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) is

considered a supporting protocol in the application layer using
CoAP. DTLS has some limitations which allow the other approaches
to be used for providing security in the application layer. The work
has already been going on in the CORE working group to propose
and evaluate new security approaches. DTLS limitations motivate
research on alternative proposals for securing IoT communications
at the application level using CoAP.

5. Adoption of ECC: Evaluation of the impact of DTLS on sensing

platforms with distinct characteristics is important because if there
is efficient availability of Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) in
hardware in IEEE 802.15.4 sensing platforms. A significant impact
can be imposed by the DTLS handshake (for authentication and key
agreement) on the devices with constrained resources, in particular
while consideration of ECC public-key cryptography for supporting
authentication and key agreement. The support of ECC for 6LoW-
PAN environments requires more research since ECC is currently
incompletely viable for resource-constrained sensing devices.

. Multicast communications: Another important aspect of consid-

eration is the inadequacy of suitable key management methods
for supporting CoAP multicast communications which are secure.
Multicast communications are not supported by DTLS (Garcia-Mor-
chon et al., 2013), (Brachmann et al., 2012b), which is an essential
requirement in most IoT applications. Again, more applicable group
key mechanisms are required to support session key establishments
among the various participating devices in secure CoAP multicast
communications.

. Object security in CoAP: The employment of object security

approaches compared to transport layer security is considered for
securing COAP communications. The usage of new CoAP options
(Granjal et al., 2013) was considered (i) to enable the identifica-
tion of application of security to given CoAP message a responsi-
ble entity, (ii) to enable data transportation for authenticating and
authorizing a CoAP client, and (iii) to enable security data trans-
portation of security-related data.

. Unexpected uses of data: With the widespread use of IoT applica-

tions, an adverse effect on the private information of citizens can be
inferred from presumed non-critical data which is not well known
or understood. McKenna et al. (2012) provided the residents with
private information such as the count of residents, daily routines,
and personal habits which are inferred from electricity load data of
smart meters in smart homes. These research attempts exploit unex-
pected use of data associated with connected sensors for smart city
environments.
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

11.3. Research challenges in EoL

1. The tamper-proof feature of blockchain: There is a body of
tamper-proof blockchain data which is never deleted leading to an
accumulation of a large amount of garbage addresses and data.
Hence the performance of the application becomes affected and
there is a need for better ways for efficiently handling the garbage
data in a blockchain.

12. Conclusion

There are ample research efforts for IoT security, but they are scat-
tered. A systematic schema is required to identify the security gaps and
address the security issues. The current paper has presented a detailed
study of product lifecycle from the IoT perspective of security by pro-
viding the necessary background required for IoT and product lifecycle.
Further, an in-depth security analysis of product lifecycle is conducted
out by listing the state-of-the-art security solutions over the last decade
by categorizing them based on lifecycle stages. The survey addresses
and compares a broad range of techniques, methods, models, function-
alities, systems, applications, and middleware solutions related to IoT,
IoT security, and device lifecycle. The comparison and assessment of the
available security mechanisms in product lifecycle can aid in selecting
the appropriate secure techniques. Thus, the review is useful for imple-
menting security in dynamic applications as per user requirements.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgment

The research leading to this publication is supported by the Euro-
pean Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (bloTope;
grant 688203 and FINEST TWINS; grant 856602) and Academy of Fin-
land (Open Messaging Interface; grant 296096).

References

Abbas, N., Asim, M., Tariq, N., Baker, T., Abbas, S., 2019. A mechanism for securing
iot-enabled applications at the fog layer. J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 8 (1), 16, https://
doi.org/10.3390/jsan8010016 [Online]. Available.

Abdmeziem, M.R., Tandjaoui, D., Romdhani, I., 2015. A decentralized batch-based
group key management protocol for mobile internet of things (DBGK). In: 15th IEEE
International Conference on Computer and Information Technology, CIT 2015; 14th
IEEE International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing and Communications,
IUCC 2015; 13th IEEE International Conference on Dependable, Autonomic and
Secure Computing, DASC 2015; 13th IEEE International Conference on Pervasive
Intelligence and Computing, PICom 2015, Liverpool, United Kingdom, October
26-28, 2015, pp. 1109-1117, https://doi.org/10.1109/CIT/IUCC/DASC/PICOM.
2015.166 [Online]. Available.

Abera, T., Asokan, N., Davi, L., Koushanfar, F., Paverd, A., Sadeghi, A., Tsudik, G., 2016.
Invited - things, trouble, trust: on building trust in iot systems. pp. 121:1121:6. In:
Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Design Automation Conference, DAC 2016, Austin,
TX, USA, June 5-9, 2016, https://doi.org/10.1145/2897937.2905020 [Online].
Available.

Abomhara, M., Kien, G.M., 2014. Security and privacy in the internet of things: current
status and open issues. In: 2014 International Conference on Privacy and Security in
Mobile Systems, PRISMS 2014, Aalborg, Denmark, May 11-14, 2014, pp. 1-8,
https://doi.org/10.1109/PRISMS.2014.6970594 [Online]. Available.

Aghili, S.F., Mala, H., Shojafar, M., Peris-Lopez, P., 2019. LACO: lightweight three-factor
authentication, access control and ownership transfer scheme for e-health systems in
iot. Future Generat. Comput. Syst. 96, 410-424, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.
2019.02.020 [Online]. Available.

Al-Fugaha, A.I., Guizani, M., Mohammadi, M., Aledhari, M., Ayyash, M., 2015. Internet
of things: a survey on enabling technologies, protocols, and applications. IEEE
Communications Surveys and Tutorials 17 (4), 2347-2376, https://doi.org/10.
1109/COMST.2015.2444095 [Online]. Available.

34

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Al-Turjman, F., Alturjman, S., 2018. Confidential smart-sensing framework in the iot era.
J. Supercomput. 74 (10), 5187-5198, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11227-018-2524-1
[Online]. Available.

Alaba, F.A., Othman, M., Hashem, I.A.T., Alotaibi, F., 2017. Internet of things security: a
survey. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 88, 10-28, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2017.04.
002 [Online]. Available.

Alcaide, A., Palomar, E., Montero-Castillo, J., Ribagorda, A., 2013. Anonymous
authentication for privacy-preserving iot target-driven applications. Comput. Secur.
37, 111-123, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2013.05.007 [Online]. Available.

Alexopoulos, N., Habib, S.M., Mhlhuser, M., 2018. Towards secure distributed trust
management on a global scale: an analytical approach for applying distributed
ledgers for authorization in the iot. In: Proceedings of the 2018 Workshop on IoT
Security and Privacy, loT S&kP@SIGCOMM 2018, Budapest, Hungary, August 20,
2018, pp. 49-54, https://doi.org/10.1145/3229565.3229569 [Online]. Available.

Alghamdi, K., Alqazzaz, A., Liu, A., Ming, H., 2018. Iotverif: an automated tool to verify
SSL/TLS certificate validation in android MQTT client applications. In: Proceedings
of the Eighth ACM Conference on Data and Application Security and Privacy,
CODASPY 2018, Tempe, AZ, USA, March 19-21, 2018, pp. 95-102, https://doi.org/
10.1145/3176258.3176334 [Online]. Available.

Ali, B., Awad, A.I., 2018. Cyber and physical security vulnerability assessment for
iot-based smart homes. Sensors 18 (3), 817, https://doi.org/10.3390/s18030817
[Online]. Available.

Alrawi, O., Lever, C., Antonakakis, M., Monrose, F., 2019. Sok: security evaluation of
home-based iot deployments. In: 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, SP
2019, San Francisco, CA, USA, May 19-23, 2019, pp. 1362-1380, https://doi.org/
10.1109/SP.2019.00013 [Online]. Available.

Alshehri, M.D., Hussain, F.K., 2019. A fuzzy security protocol for trust management in
the internet of things (fuzzy-iot). Computing 101 (7), 791-818, https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00607-018-0685-7 [Online]. Available.

Aman, M.N., Chua, K.C., Sikdar, B., 2017. Mutual authentication in iot systems using
physical unclonable functions. IEEE Internet of Things J. 4 (5), 1327-1340, https://
doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2017.2703088 [Online]. Available.

Aman, M.N., Sikdar, B., Chua, K.C., Ali, A., 2018. Low power data integrity in iot
systems. IEEE Internet of Things J. 5 (4), 3102-3113, https://doi.org/10.1109/
JIOT.2018.2833206 [Online]. Available.

Ammar, M., Russello, G., Crispo, B., 2018. Internet of things: a survey on the security of
iot frameworks. J. Inf. Sec. Appl. 38, 8-27, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jisa.2017.11.
002 [Online]. Available.

Andrea, I., Chrysostomou, C., Hadjichristofi, G.C., 2015. Internet of things: security
vulnerabilities and challenges. In: 2015 IEEE Symposium on Computers and
Communication, ISCC 2015, Larnaca, Cyprus, July 6-9, 2015, pp. 180-187, https://
doi.org/10.1109/ISCC.2015.7405513 [Online]. Available.

Anggorojati, B., Mahalle, P.N., Prasad, N.R., Prasad, R., 2012. Capability-based access
control delegation model on the federated iot network. In: The 15th International
Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications, WPMC 2012, Taipei,
Taiwan, September 24-27, 2012, pp. 604-608 [Online]. Available http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/6398784/.

Antonakakis, M., April, T., Bailey, M., Bernhard, M., Bursztein, E., Cochran, J.,
Durumeric, Z., Halderman, J.A., Invernizzi, L., Kallitsis, M., Kumar, D., Lever, C.,
Ma, Z., Mason, J., Menscher, D., Seaman, C., Sullivan, N., Thomas, K., Zhou, Y.,
2017. Understanding the mirai botnet. In: 26th USENIX Security Symposium,
USENIX Security 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada, August 16-18, 2017, pp. 1093-1110
[Online]. Available
https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity17/technical-sessions/p
resentation/antonakakis.

Apthorpe, N., Reisman, D., Feamster, N., 2017. A smart home is no castle: privacy
vulnerabilities of encrypted iot traffic. vol. abs/1705.06805 CoRR. [Online].
Available http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.06805.

Arif, M., Shi, P., Ullah, A., Mahmood, K., Abid, M., Luo, X., 2019. Logical tree based
secure rekeying management for smart devices groups in iot enabled WSN. IEEE
Access 7, 76699-76711, https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2921999 [Online].
Available.

Attaran, A., Rashidzadeh, R., 2016. Chipless radio frequency identification tag for iot
applications. IEEE Internet of Things J. 3 (6), 1310-1318, https://doi.org/10.1109/
JIOT.2016.2589928 [Online]. Available.

Atwady, Y., Hammoudeh, M., 2017. A survey on authentication techniques for the
internet of things. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Future
Networks and Distributed Systems, ICFNDS 2017, Cambridge, United Kingdom, July
19-20, 2017, p. 8, https://doi.org/10.1145/3102304.3102312 [Online]. Available.

Atzori, L., Iera, A., Morabito, G., 2010. The internet of things: a survey. Comput.
Network. 54 (15), 2787-2805, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2010.05.010
[Online]. Available.

Babar, S., Mahalle, P., Stango, A., Prasad, N.R., Prasad, R., 2010. Proposed security
model and threat taxonomy for the internet of things (iot). In: Recent Trends in
Network Security and Applications - Third International Conference, CNSA 2010,
Chennai, India, July 23-25, 2010. Proceedings, pp. 420-429, https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-14478-3_42 [Online]. Available.

Babar, S., Stango, A., Prasad, N., Sen, J., Prasad, R., 2011. Proposed embedded security
framework for internet of things (iot). In: Wireless Communication, Vehicular
Technology, Information Theory and Aerospace & Electronic Systems Technology
(Wireless VITAE), 2011 2nd International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 1-5.

Banerjee, U., Juvekar, C., Wright, Arvind, A., Chandrakasan, A.P., 2018. An
energy-efficient reconfigurable DTLS cryptographic engine for end-to-end security in
iot applications. In: 2018 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference, ISSCC
2018, San Francisco, CA, USA, February 11-15, 2018, pp. 42-44, https://doi.org/10.
1109/ISSCC.2018.8310174 [Online]. Available.
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Barnes, M., Alexa, are you listening? F-secure. [Online]. Available https: //labs.f-secure.
com/archive/alexa-are-you-listening/.

Battisti, F., Bernieri, G., Carli, M., Lopardo, M., Pascucci, F., 2018. Detecting integrity
attacks in iot-based cyber physical systems: a case study on hydra testbed. In: 2018
Global Internet of Things Summit, GIloTS 2018, Bilbao, Spain, June 4-7, 2018, pp.
1-6, https://doi.org/10.1109/GIOTS.2018.8534437 [Online]. Available.

Bauer, J., Staudemeyer, R.C., Phls, H.C., Fragkiadakis, A.G., 2016. ECDSA on things: iot
integrity protection in practise. In: Information and Communications Security - 18th
International Conference, ICICS 2016, Singapore, November 29-December 2, 2016,
Proceedings, pp. 3-17, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-50011-9_1 [Online].
Available.

G. Berelejis, D. Zehavi, and E. D. Ilsar, Method and apparatus for identifying a physical
iot device, Apr. 18 2017, uS Patent 9,628,691.

Beresford, A.R., 2016. Whack-a-mole security: incentivising the production, delivery and
installation of security updates (invited paper). In: Proceedings of the 1st
International Workshop on Innovations in Mobile Privacy and Security, IMPS 2016,
Co-located with the International Symposium on Engineering Secure Software and
Systems (ESSoS 2016), London, UK, April 6, 2016, pp. 9-10 [Online]. Available
http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1575/invited_paper_1.pdf.

Bertin, E., Hussein, D., Sengul, C., Frey, V., 2019. Access control in the internet of things:
a survey of existing approaches and open research questions. Ann. Telecommun. 74
(78), 375-388, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12243-019-00709-7 [Online]. Available.

Bertino, E., Islam, N., 2017. Botnets and internet of things security. IEEE Comput. 50
(2), 76-79, https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2017.62 [Online]. Available.

Bhattacharjee, S., Salimitari, M., Chatterjee, M., Kwiat, K.A., Kamhoua, C.A., 2017.
Preserving data integrity in iot networks under opportunistic data manipulation. In:
15th IEEE Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing, 15th Intl
Conf on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, 3rd Intl Conf on Big Data
Intelligence and Computing and Cyber Science and Technology Congress,
DASC/PiCom/DataCom/CyberSciTech 2017, Orlando, FL, USA, November 6-10,
2017, pp. 446-453, https://doi.org/10.1109/DASC-PICom-DataCom-CyberSciTec.
2017.87 [Online]. Available.

Bock, B., Matysik, J., Krentz, K., Meinel, C., 2019. Link layer key revocation and
rekeying for the adaptive key establishment scheme. In: 5th IEEE World Forum on
Internet of Things, WF-IoT 2019, Limerick, Ireland, April 15-18, 2019, pp. 374-379,
https://doi.org/10.1109/WF-IoT.2019.8767211 [Online]. Available.

Bouanani, S.E., Kiram, M.A.E., Achbarou, O., Outchakoucht, A., 2019. Pervasive-based
access control model for iot environments. IEEE Access 7, 54575-54585, https://
doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2912975 [Online]. Available.

Boudguiga, A., Bouzerna, N., Granboulan, L., Olivereau, A., Quesnel, F., Roger, A.,
Sirdey, R., 2017. Towards better availability and accountability for iot updates by
means of a blockchain. In: 2017 IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy
Workshops, EuroS&P Workshops 2017, Paris, France, April 26-28, 2017, pp. 50-58,
https://doi.org/10.1109/EuroSPW.2017.50 [Online]. Available.

Boussada, R., Elhdhili, M.E., Sadane, L.A., 2018. A lightweight privacy-preserving
solution for iot: the case of e-health. In: 20th IEEE International Conference on High
Performance Computing and Communications; 16th IEEE International Conference
on Smart City; 4th IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Systems,
HPCC/SmartCity/DSS 2018, Exeter, United Kingdom, June 28-30, 2018, pp.
555-562, https://doi.org/10.1109/HPCC/SmartCity/DSS.2018.00104 [Online].
Available.

Brachmann, M., Keoh, S.L., Morchon, O.G., Kumar, S.S., 2012. End-to-end transport
security in the ip-based internet of things. In: 21st International Conference on
Computer Communications and Networks, ICCCN 2012, Munich, Germany, July
30-August 2, 2012, pp. 1-5, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCCN.2012.6289292
[Online]. Available.

Brachmann, M., Garcia-Mochon, O., Keoh, S.-L., Kumar, S.S., 2012. Security
considerations around end-to-end security in the ip-based internet of things. In:
Workshop on Smart Object Security, in Conjunction with IETF83, Paris, France,
March 23, 2012.

Butun, I., Sari, A., sterberg, P., 2019. Security implications of fog computing on the
internet of things. In: IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics, ICCE
2019, Las Vegas, NV, USA, January 11-13, 2019. IEEE, pp. 1-6, https://doi.org/10.
1109/ICCE.2019.8661909. [Online]. Available.

Cai, H., Xu, L.D., Xu, B., Xie, C., Qin, S., Jiang, L., 2014. Iot-based configurable
information service platform for product lifecycle management. IEEE Trans. Indust.
Inform. 10 (2), 1558-1567, https://doi.org/10.1109/TI.2014.2306391 [Online].
Available.

Cebe, M., Akkaya, K., 2019. Efficient certificate revocation management schemes for
iot-based advanced metering infrastructures in smart cities. Ad Hoc Netw. 92,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2018.10.027 [Online]. Available.

Chamarajnagar, R., Ashok, A., 2019. Integrity threat identification for distributed iot in
precision agriculture. In: 16th Annual IEEE International Conference on Sensing,
Communication, and Networking, SECON 2019, Boston, MA, USA, June 10-13,
2019, pp. 1-9, https://doi.org/10.1109/SAHCN.2019.8824841 [Online]. Available.

Che, S., Feng, R., Liang, X., Wang, X., 2015. A lightweight trust management based on
bayesian and entropy for wireless sensor networks. Secur. Commun. Network. 8 (2),
168-175, https://doi.org/10.1002/sec.969 [Online]. Available.

Chen, I., Guo, J., Bao, F., 2014. Trust management for service composition in soa-based
iot systems. In: IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, WCNC
2014, Istanbul, Turkey, April 6-9, 2014, pp. 3444-3449, https://doi.org/10.1109/
WCNC.2014.6953138 [Online]. Available.

Chen, I., Guo, J., Bao, F., 2016. Trust management for soa-based iot and its application
to service composition. IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput. 9 (3), 482-495, https://doi.org/
10.1109/TSC.2014.2365797 [Online]. Available.

35

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Chhetri, S.R., Faezi, S., Rashid, N., Faruque, M.A.A., 2018. Manufacturing supply chain
and product lifecycle security in the era of industry 4.0. J. Hardware Syst. Secur. 2
(1), 51-68, https://doi.org/10.1007/s41635-017-0031-0 [Online]. Available.

Chiang, M., Zhang, T., 2016. Fog and iot: an overview of research opportunities. IEEE
Internet of Things J. 3 (6), 854-864, https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2016.2584538
[Online]. Available.

Chien, H., 2018. Dynamic public key certificates for iot and WSN scenarios. In: 2018
IEEE 42nd Annual Computer Software and Applications Conference, COMPSAC
2018, Tokyo, Japan, 23-27 July 2018, vol. 2, pp. 646-651, https://doi.org/10.
1109/COMPSAC.2018.10311 [Online]. Available.

Corchia, L., Benedetto, E.D., Monti, G., Cataldo, A., Angrisani, L., Arpaia, P., Tarricone,
L., 2019. Radio-frequency identification based on textile, wearable, chipless tags for
iot applications. In: 2nd Workshop on Metrology for Industry 4.0 and IoT
MetroInd4.0&IoT 2019, Naples, Italy, June 4-6, 2019, pp. 1-5, https://doi.org/10.
1109/METROI4.2019.8792919 [Online]. Available.

Costa, L., Barros, J.P., Tavares, M., 2019. Vulnerabilities in iot devices for smart home
environment. In: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Information
Systems Security and Privacy, ICISSP 2019, Prague, Czech Republic, February
23-25, 2019, pp. 615-622, https://doi.org/10.5220/0007583306150622 [Online].
Available.

Crossman, M.A., Liu, H., 2015. Study of authentication with iot testbed. In: Technologies
for Homeland Security (HST), 2015 IEEE International Symposium on. IEEE, pp.
1-7.

Daubert, J., Wiesmaier, A., Kikiras, P., 2015. A view on privacy & trust in iot,. In: IEEE
International Conference on Communication, ICC 2015, London, United Kingdom,
June 8-12, 2015, Workshop Proceedings, pp. 2665-2670, https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICCW.2015.7247581 [Online]. Available.

Devi, G.U., Balan, E.V., Priyan, M., Gokulnath, C., 2015. Mutual authentication scheme
for iot application. Indian J. Sci. Technol. 8 (26).

Din, I.U., Guizani, M., Kim, B., Hassan, S., Khan, M.K., 2019. Trust management
techniques for the internet of things: a survey. IEEE Access 7, 29763-29787,
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2880838 [Online]. Available.

Ding, S., Cao, J., Li, C., Fan, K., Li, H., 2019. A novel attribute-based access control
scheme using blockchain for iot. IEEE Access 7, 38431-38441, https://doi.org/10.
1109/ACCESS.2019.2905846 [Online]. Available.

Dinh, N., Kim, Y., 2018. An efficient availability guaranteed deployment scheme for iot
service chains over fog-core cloud networks. Sensors 18 (11), 3970, https://doi.org/
10.3390/s18113970 [Online]. Available.

Diro, A.A., Chilamkurti, N., Kumar, N., 2017. Lightweight cybersecurity schemes using
elliptic curve cryptography in publish-subscribe fog computing. MONET 22 (5),
848-858, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11036-017-0851-8 [Online]. Available.

Dizdarevic, J., Carpio, F., Jukan, A., Masip-Bruin, X., 2019. A survey of communication
protocols for internet of things and related challenges of fog and cloud computing
integration. pp. 116:1116:29 ACM Comput. Surv. 51 (6), https://doi.org/10.1145/
3292674 [Online]. Available.

Domingo, M.C., 2012. An overview of the internet of underwater things. J. Netw.
Comput. Appl. 35 (6), 1879-1890, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2012.07.012
[Online]. Available.

Doshi, R., Apthorpe, N., Feamster, N., 2018. Machine learning ddos detection for
consumer internet of things devices. In: 2018 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops,
SP Workshops 2018, San Francisco, CA, USA, May 24, 2018, pp. 29-35, https://doi.
org/10.1109/SPW.2018.00013 [Online]. Available.

Duan, L., Li, Y., Liao, L., 2018. Flexible certificate revocation list for efficient
authentication in iot. pp. 7:17:8. In: Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on the Internet of Things, IOT 2018, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, October 15-18, 2018,
https://doi.org/10.1145/3277593.3277595 [Online]. Available.

Edwards, S., Profetis, I., 2016. Hajime: analysis of a decentralized internet worm for iot
devices. Rapid. Netw. 16.

El-hajj, M., Chamoun, M., Fadlallah, A., Serhrouchni, A., 2017. Taxonomy of
authentication techniques in internet of things (iot). In: Research and Development
(SCOReD), 2017 IEEE 15th Student Conference on. IEEE, pp. 67-71.

Elkhodr, M., Shahrestani, S., Cheung, H., 2012. A review of mobile location privacy in
the internet of things,. In: 2012 Tenth International Conference on ICT and
Knowledge Engineering. IEEE, pp. 266-272.

Eugster, P., Kumar, S., Savvides, S., Stephen, J.J., 2019. Ensuring confidentiality in the
cloud of things. IEEE Perv. Comput. 18 (1), 10-18, https://doi.org/10.1109/MPRV.
2018.2877286 [Online]. Available.

Fan, K., Gong, Y., Liang, C., Li, H., Yang, Y., 2016. Lightweight and ultralightweight
RFID mutual authentication protocol with cache in the reader for iot in 5g. Secur.
Commun. Network. 9 (16), 3095-3104, https://doi.org/10.1002/sec.1314 [Online].
Available.

Farooq, M.U., Waseem, M., Khairi, A., Mazhar, S., 2015. A critical analysis on the
security concerns of internet of things (iot). In: International Journal of Computer
Applications, vol. 111, no. 7.

Farris, I., Taleb, T., Khettab, Y., Song, J., 2019. A survey on emerging SDN and NFV
security mechanisms for iot systems. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials 21
(1), 812-837, https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2018.2862350 [Online]. Available.

Ferrag, M.A., Maglaras, L.A., Janicke, H., Jiang, J., Shu, L., 2017. Authentication
protocols for internet of things: a comprehensive survey. pp. 6562953:16562953
Secur. Commun. Network. 2017 (41), https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/6562953
[Online]. Available.

Frmling, K., Holmstrm, J., 2006. How to create evolving information models by a
layered information architecture. In: Proceedings of the Modern Information
Technology in the Innovation Processes of the Industrial Enterprises (MITIP2006),
pp. 173-178.
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Frmling, K., Maharjan, M., 2013. Standardized communication between intelligent
products for the iot. IFAC Proceed. Vol. 46 (7), 157-162.

Frmling, K., Kubler, S., Buda, A., 2014. Universal messaging standards for the iot from a
lifecycle management perspective. IEEE Internet of Things J. 1 (4), 319-327,
https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2014.2332005 [Online]. Available.

Fremantle, P., Aziz, B., 2016. Oauthing: privacy-enhancing federation for the internet of
things. In: 2016 Cloudification of the Internet of Things, CloT 2016, Paris, France,
November 23-25, 2016, pp. 1-6, https://doi.org/10.1109/CIOT.2016.7872911
[Online]. Available.

Fremantle, P., Scott, P., 2017. A survey of secure middleware for the internet of things.
PeerJ Comp. Sci. 3, e114, https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.114 [Online]. Available.

Fremantle, P., Aziz, B., Kopeck, J., Scott, P., 2014. Federated identity and access
management for the internet of things. In: 2014 International Workshop on Secure
Internet of Things, SloT 2014, Wroclaw, Poland, September 10, 2014, pp. 10-17,
https://doi.org/10.1109/SIoT.2014.8 [Online]. Available.

Garca-Magario, I., Sendra, S., Lacuesta, R., Lloret, J., 2019. Security in vehicles with iot
by prioritization rules, vehicle certificates, and trust management. IEEE Internet of
Things J. 6 (4), 5927-5934, https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2018.2871255 [Online].
Available.

Garcia-Morchon, O., Kumar, S., Struik, R., Keoh, S., Hummen, R., 2013. Security
Considerations in the Ip-Based Internet of Things.

Ghuli, P., Kumar, U.P., Shettar, R., 2017. A review on blockchain application for
decentralized decision of ownership of iot devices. Adv. Comput. Sci. Technol. 10
(8), 2449-2456.

Gonalves, F., Macedo, J., Nicolau, M.J., Santos, A., 2013. Security architecture for
mobile e-health applications in medication control. In: 21st International
Conference on Software, Telecommunications and Computer Networks, SoftCOM
2013, Split-Primosten, Croatia, September 18-20, 2013, pp. 1-8, https://doi.org/10.
1109/SoftCOM.2013.6671901 [Online]. Available.

Gou, Q., Yan, L., Liu, Y., Li, Y., 2013. Construction and strategies in iot security system.
In: 2013 IEEE International Conference on Green Computing and Communications
(GreenCom) and JEEE Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and
Social Computing (CPSCom), Beijing, China, August 20-23, 2013, pp. 1129-1132,
https://doi.org/10.1109/GreenCom-iThings-CPSCom.2013.195 [Online]. Available.

Granjal, J., Monteiro, E., Silva, J.S., 2013. Application-layer security for the wot:
extending coap to support end-to-end message security for internet-integrated
sensing applications. In: International Conference on Wired/Wireless Internet
Communication. Springer, pp. 140-153.

Granjal, J., Monteiro, E., Silva, J.S., 2015. Security for the internet of things: a survey of
existing protocols and open research issues. IEEE Communications Surveys and
Tutorials 17 (3), 1294-1312, https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2015.2388550
[Online]. Available.

Grebler, L., 2017. Why do iot devices die? . [Online]. Available https://medium.com/
iotforall/why- do-iot-devices-die-e4df0c7a075d.

Guan, Z., Zhang, Y., Wu, L., Wu, J., Li, J., Ma, Y., Hu, J., 2019. APPA: an anonymous and
privacy preserving data aggregation scheme for fog-enhanced iot. J. Netw. Comput.
Appl. 125, 82-92, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2018.09.019 [Online]. Available.

Gubbi, J., Buyya, R., Marusic, S., Palaniswami, M., 2013. Internet of things (iot): a
vision, architectural elements, and future directions. Future Generat. Comput. Syst.
29 (7), 1645-1660, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2013.01.010 [Online].
Available.

Gusmeroli, S., Piccione, S., Rotondi, D., 2013. A capability-based security approach to
manage access control in the internet of things. Math. Comput. Model. 58 (56),
1189-1205, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcm.2013.02.006 [Online]. Available.

Ham, H., Kim, H., Kim, M., Choi, M., 2014. Linear svm-based android malware detection
for reliable iot services. pp. 594501:1594501 J. Appl. Math. 2014 (10), https://doi.
org/10.1155/2014/594501 [Online]. Available.

Hnel, T., Bothe, A., Helmke, R., Gericke, C., Aschenbruck, N., 2017. Adjustable security
for rfid-equipped iot devices. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on RFID
Technology & Application (RFID-TA). IEEE, pp. 208-213.

Hasiba, B.A., Kahloul, L., Benharzallah, S., 2018. A new hybrid access control model for
security policies in multimodal applications environments. J. UCS 24 (4), 392-416
[Online]. Available, http://www.jucs.org/jucs_24 4/a_new_hybrid_access.

Hassija, V., Chamola, V., Saxena, V., Jain, D., Goyal, P., Sikdar, B., 2019. A survey on iot
security: application areas, security threats, and solution architectures. IEEE Access
7, 82721-82743, https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2924045 [Online].
Available.

Heer, T., Morchon, O.G., Hummen, R., Keoh, S.L., Kumar, S.S., Wehrle, K., 2011.
Security challenges in the ip-based internet of things. Wireless Pers. Commun. 61
(3), 527-542, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11277-011-0385-5 [Online]. Available.

Hellweg, S., i Canals, L.M., 2014. Emerging approaches, challenges and opportunities in
life cycle assessment. Science 344 (6188), 1109-1113.

Horrow, S., Sardana, A., 2012. Identity management framework for cloud based internet
of things. In: First International Conference on Security of Internet of Things,
SECURIT 12, Kollam, India - August 17-19, 2012, pp. 200-203, https://doi.org/10.
1145/2490428.2490456 [Online]. Available.

Hossain, M.S., Muhammad, G., Rahman, S.M.M., Abdul, W., Alelaiwi, A., Alamri, A.,
2016. Toward end-to-end biomet rics-based security for iot infrastructure. IEEE
Wireless Commun. 23 (5), 44-51.

Howell, J., Number of connected iot devices will surge to 125 billion by 2030, ihs markit
says. IHS Markit. [Online]. Available
https://technology.ihs.com/596542/number-of-connected-iot-devices-will-
surge-to-125-billion-by-2030- ihs-markit-says.

Hu, C., Zhang, J., Wen, Q., 2011. An identity-based personal location system with
protected privacy in iot. In: 2011 4th IEEE International Conference on Broadband
Network and Multimedia Technology. IEEE, pp. 192-195.

36

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Huang, Q., Wang, L., Yang, Y., 2018. DECENT: secure and fine-grained data access
control with policy updating for constrained iot devices. World Wide Web 21 (1),
151-167, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11280-017-0462-0 [Online]. Available.

Hummen, R., Wirtz, H., Ziegeldorf, J.H., Hiller, J., Wehrle, K., 2013. Tailoring
end-to-end IP security protocols to the internet of things. In: 2013 21st IEEE
International Conference on Network Protocols, ICNP 2013, Gttingen, Germany,
October 7-10, 2013, pp. 1-10, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICNP.2013.6733571
[Online]. Available.

Hummen, R., Ziegeldorf, J.H., Shafagh, H., Raza, S., Wehrle, K., 2013. Towards viable
certificate-based authentication for the internet of things. In: Proceedings of the 2nd
ACM Workshop on Hot Topics on Wireless Network Security and Privacy. ACM, pp.
37-42.

Hurrah, N.N., Parah, S.A., Sheikh, J.A., Al-Turjman, F., Muhammad, K., 2019. Secure
data transmission framework for confidentiality in iots. Ad Hoc Netw. 95, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2019.101989 [Online]. Available.

Huth, C., Duplys, P., Gneysu, T., 2016. Secure software update and IP protection for
untrusted devices in the internet of things via physically unclonable functions,. In:
2016 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communication
Workshops, PerCom Workshops 2016, Sydney, Australia, March 14-18, 2016, pp.
1-6, https://doi.org/10.1109/PERCOMW.2016.7457156 [Online]. Available.

Hwang, D., Choi, J., Kim, K., 2018. Dynamic access control scheme for iot devices using
blockchain. In: International Conference on Information and Communication
Technology Convergence, ICTC 2018, Jeju Island, Korea (South), October 17-19,
2018, pp. 713-715, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICTC.2018.8539659 [Online].
Available.

IAB, Internet of things software update workshop (iotsu). [Online]. Available https: //
www.iab.org/activities/workshops/iotsu/.

Jara, A.J., Kafle, V.P., Gmez-Skarmeta, A.F., 2013. Secure and scalable mobility
management scheme for the internet of things integration in the future internet
architecture. IJAHUC 13 (3/4), 228-242, https://doi.org/10.1504/IJAHUC.2013.
055468 [Online]. Available.

Jeong, J., 2010. Stages of the product life cycle, Wiley International Encyclopedia of
Marketing.

Jeong, Y., Lee, J.D., Lee, J., Jung, J., Park, J.H., 2014. An efficient and secure m-ips
scheme of mobile devices for human-centric computing. pp. 198580:1198580 J.
Appl. Math. 2014 (8), https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/198580 [Online]. Available.

Jia, Y.J., Chen, Q.A., Wang, S., Rahmati, A., Fernandes, E., Mao, Z.M., Prakash, A., 2017.
Contexlot: towards providing contextual integrity to appified iot platforms. In: 24th
Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, NDSS 2017, San
Diego, California, USA, February 26-March 1, 2017 [Online]. Available
https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss2017/ndss-2017-programme/contexlot-t
owards-providing-contextual-integrity-appified-iot-platforms/.

Johnson, A.P., Patranabis, S., Chakraborty, R.S., Mukhopadhyay, D., 2017. Remote
dynamic partial reconfiguration: a threat to internet-of-things and embedded
security applications, Microprocessors and Microsystems - Embedded Hardware
Design, vol. 52, pp. 131-144, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micpro.2017.06.005
[Online]. Available.

Jourdan, T., Boutet, A., Frindel, C., 2018. Toward privacy in iot mobile devices for
activity recognition. In: Proceedings of the 15th EAI International Conference on
Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems: Computing, Networking and Services, MobiQuitous
2018, 5-7 November 2018, New York City, NY, USA, pp. 155-165, https://doi.org/
10.1145/3286978.3287009 [Online]. Available.

Kai, K., pang, Z.-b., Cong, W., 2013. Security and privacy mechanism for health internet
of things. J. China Univ. Posts Telecommun. 20, 64-68.

Kalra, S., Sood, S.K., 2015. Secure authentication scheme for iot and cloud servers.
Pervasive Mob. Comput. 24, 210-223, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmcj.2015.08.001
[Online]. Available.

Karagiannis, V., Chatzimisios, P., Vazquez-Gallego, F., Alonso-Zarate, J., 2015. A survey
on application layer protocols for the internet of things. Trans. loT Cloud Comput. 3
(1), 11-17.

Krkkinen, M., Holmstrm, J., Frmling, K., Artto, K., 2003. Intelligent products - a step
towards a more effective project delivery chain. Comput. Ind. 50 (2), 141-151,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0166-3615(02)00116-1 [Online]. Available.

Khalaf, R.H., Mohammed, A.H., 2018. Confidentiality and integrity of sensing data
transmission in iot application. Int. J. Eng. Technol. 7 (4.25), 240-245.

Khan, R., Khan, S.U., Zaheer, R., Khan, S., 2012. Future internet: the internet of things
architecture, possible applications and key challenges. In: 10th International
Conference on Frontiers of Information Technology, FIT 2012, Islamabad, Pakistan,
December 17-19, 2012, pp. 257-260, https://doi.org/10.1109/FIT.2012.53
[Online]. Available.

Khan, W.Z., Aalsalem, M.Y., Khan, M.K., 2018. Five acts of consumer behavior: a
potential security and privacy threat to internet of things. In: IEEE International
Conference on Consumer Electronics, ICCE 2018, Las Vegas, NV, USA, January
12-14, 2018, pp. 1-3, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCE.2018.8326124 [Online].
Available.

Khan, M.S.N., Marchal, S., Buchegger, S., Asokan, N., 2018. chowniot: enhancing iot
privacy by automated handling of ownership change. In: Privacy and Identity
Management. Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency in the Age of Big Data -
13th IFIP WG 9.2, 9.6/11.7, 11.6/SIG 9.2.2 International Summer School, Vienna,
Austria, August 20-24, 2018, Revised Selected Papers, pp. 205-221, https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-030-16744-8_14 [Online]. Available.

Kim, H., Wasicek, A., Mehne, B., Lee, E.A., 2016. A secure network architecture for the
internet of things based on local authorization entities. In: 4th IEEE International
Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud, FiCloud 2016, Vienna, Austria,
August 22-24, 2016, pp. 114-122, https://doi.org/10.1109/FiCloud.2016.24
[Online]. Available.
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Kim, D., Kim, S., Park, J.H., 2018. Remote software update in trusted connection of long
range iot networking integrated with mobile edge cloud. IEEE Access 6,
66831-66840, https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2774239 [Online]. Available.

Kiritsis, D., Bufardi, A., Xirouchakis, P., 2003. Research issues on product lifecycle
management and information tracking using smart embedded systems. Adv. Eng.
Inf. 17 (34), 189-202.

Kivinen, T., 2012. Minimal Ikev2.

Kolias, C., Kambourakis, G., Stavrou, A., Voas, J.M., 2017. Ddos in the iot: mirai and
other botnets. IEEE Comput. 50 (7), 80-84, https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2017.201
[Online]. Available.

Kolisnyk, M., Kharchenko, V.S., Piskachova, I., Bardis, N.G., 2017. A markov model of
iot system availability considering ddos attacks and energy modes of server and
router. In: Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on ICT in Education,
Research and Industrial Applications. Integration, Harmonization and Knowledge
Transfer, ICTERI 2017, Kyiv, Ukraine, May 15-18, 2017, pp. 699-712 [Online].
Available http://ceur- ws.org/Vol- 1844/10000699. pdf.

Kolluru, K.K., Paniagua, C., van Deventer, J., Eliasson, J., Delsing, J., DeLong, R.J.,
2018. An AAA solution for securing industrial iot devices using next generation
access control. In: IEEE Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems, ICPS 2018, Saint
Petersburg, Russia, May 15-18, 2018, pp. 737-742, https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICPHYS.2018.8390799 [Online]. Available.

Kolomvatsos, K., 2018. An intelligent, uncertainty driven management scheme for
software updates in pervasive iot applications. Future Generat. Comput. Syst. 83,
116-131, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2018.01.036 [Online]. Available.

Kothmayr, T., Schmitt, C., Hu, W., Brnig, M., Carle, G., 2012. A DTLS based end-to-end
security architecture for the internet of things with two-way authentication. In: 37th
Annual IEEE Conference on Local Computer Networks, Workshop Proceedings,
Clearwater Beach, FL, USA, October 22-25, 2012, pp. 956-963, https://doi.org/10.
1109/LCNW.2012.6424088 [Online]. Available.

Kouicem, D.E., Bouabdallah, A., Lakhlef, H., 2018. Internet of things security: a
top-down survey. Comput. Network. 141, 199-221, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
comnet.2018.03.012 [Online]. Available.

Kravitz, D.W., Cooper, J., 2017. Securing user identity and transactions symbiotically:
iot meets blockchain. In: Global Internet of Things Summit, GloTS 2017, Geneva,
Switzerland, June 6-9, 2017, pp. 1-6, https://doi.org/10.1109/GIOTS.2017.
8016280 [Online]. Available.

Kryvinska, N., Strauss, C., 2013. Conceptual model of business services availability vs.
interoperability on collaborative iot-enabled ebusiness platforms. In: Internet of
Things and Inter-cooperative Computational Technologies for Collective
Intelligence, pp. 167-187, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-34952-2 7 [Online].
Available.

Kubler, S., Yoo, M., Cassagnes, C., Frmling, K., Kiritsis, D., Skilton, M., 2015.
Opportunity to leverage information-as-an-asset in the iot - the road ahead. In: 3rd
International Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud, FiCloud 2015,
Rome, Italy, August 24-26, 2015, pp. 64-71, https://doi.org/10.1109/FiCloud.2015.
63 [Online]. Available.

Kubler, S., Frmling, K., Buda, A., 2015. A standardized approach to deal with firewall
and mobility policies in the iot. Pervasive Mob. Comput. 20, 100-114, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pmcj.2014.09.005 [Online]. Available.

Kumar, J.S., Patel, D.R., 2014. A survey on internet of things: security and privacy
issues. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 90 (11).

Kung, Y., Hsiao, H., 2018. Groupit: lightweight group key management for dynamic iot
environments. IEEE Internet of Things J. 5 (6), 5155-5165, https://doi.org/10.
1109/JIOT.2018.2840321 [Online]. Available.

Lehmhus, D., Wuest, T., Wellsandt, S., Bosse, S., Kaihara, T., Thoben, K., Busse, M.,
2015. Cloud-based automated design and additive manufacturing: a usage
data-enabled paradigm shift. Sensors 15 (12), 32079-32122, https://doi.org/10.
3390/s151229905 [Online]. Available.

Leng, X., Mayes, K., Lien, Y., 2014. Ownership management in the context of the
internet of things. In: 2014 International Conference on Cyber-Enabled Distributed
Computing and Knowledge Discovery, CyberC 2014, Shanghai, China, October
13-15, 2014, pp. 150-153, https://doi.org/10.1109/CyberC.2014.34 [Online].
Available.

Li, X., Xuan, Z., Wen, L., 2011. Research on the architecture of trusted security system
based on the internet of things. In: 2011 Fourth International Conference on
Intelligent Computation Technology and Automation, vol. 2. IEEE, pp. 1172-1175.

Li, N., Liu, D., Nepal, S., 2017. Lightweight mutual authentication for iot and its
applications. T-SUSC 2 (4), 359-370, https://doi.org/10.1109/TSUSC.2017.
2716953 [Online]. Available.

Li, W., Tug, S., Meng, W., Wang, Y., 2019. Designing collaborative blockchained
signature-based intrusion detection in iot environments. Future Generat. Comput.
Syst. 96, 481-489, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2019.02.064 [Online].
Available.

Lin, J., Yu, W., Zhang, N., Yang, X., Zhang, H., Zhao, W., 2017. A survey on internet of
things: architecture, enabling technologies, security and privacy, and applications.
IEEE Internet of Things J. 4 (5), 1125-1142, https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2017.
2683200 [Online]. Available.

Liu, J., Xiao, Y., Chen, C.L.P., 2012. Authentication and access control in the internet of
things. In: 32nd International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems
Workshops (ICDCS 2012 Workshops), Macau, China, June 18-21, 2012, pp.
588-592, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDCSW.2012.23 [Online]. Available.

Lpez, J., Maag, S., 2015. Towards a generic trust management framework using a
machine-learning-based trust model. In: 2015 IEEE TrustCom/BigDataSE/ISPA,
Helsinki, Finland, August 20-22, 2015, vol. 1, pp. 1343-1348, https://doi.org/10.
1109/Trustcom.2015.528 [Online]. Available.

37

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Lu, Y., Xu, L.D., 2019. Internet of things (iot) cybersecurity research: a review of current
research topics. IEEE Internet of Things J. 6 (2), 2103-2115, https://doi.org/10.
1109/JIOT.2018.2869847 [Online]. Available.

Luo, T., Xu, Z., Jin, X., Jia, Y., Ouyang, X., 2017. Iotcandyjar: towards an
intelligent-interaction honeypot for iot devices. Black Hat.

Ma, T., Kim, Y., Ma, Q., Tang, M., Zhou, W., 2005. Context-aware implementation based
on CBR for smart home. In: 2005 IEEE International Conference on Wireless and
Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications, WiMob 2005, Montreal,
Canada, August 22-14, 2005, vol. 4, pp. 112-115, https://doi.org/10.1109/WIMOB.
2005.1512957 [Online]. Available.

Mahalle, P., Babar, S., Prasad, N.R., Prasad, R., 2010. Identity management framework
towards internet of things (iot): roadmap and key challenges. In: Recent Trends in
Network Security and Applications - Third International Conference, CNSA 2010,
Chennai, India, July 23-25, 2010. Proceedings, pp. 430-439, https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-14478-3_43 [Online]. Available.

Mahalle, P., Anggorojati, B., Prasad, N.R., Prasad, R., 2012. Identity establishment and
capability based access control (IECAC) scheme for internet of things. In: The 15th
International Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications, WPMC
2012, Taipei, Taiwan, September 24-27, 2012, pp. 187-191 [Online]. Available
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6398758/.

Mahalle, P.N., Anggorojati, B., Prasad, N.R., Prasad, R., 2012. Identity driven capability
based access control (ICAC) scheme for the internet of things. In: IEEE International
Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommuncations Systems, ANTS 2012,
Bangalore, India, 16-19 December, 2012, pp. 49-54, https://doi.org/10.1109/
ANTS.2012.6524227 [Online]. Available.

Mahalle, P.N., Anggorojati, B., Prasad, N.R., Prasad, R., et al., 2013. Identity
authentication and capability based access control (iacac) for the internet of things.
J. Cyber Secur. Mob. 1 (4), 309-348.

Mahalle, P.N., Prasad, N.R., Prasad, R., 2014. Threshold cryptography-based group
authentication (TCGA) scheme for the internet of things (iot). In: 4th International
Conference on Wireless Communications, Vehicular Technology, Information Theory
and Aerospace & Electronic Systems, VITAE 2014, Aalborg, Denmark, May 11-14,
2014, pp. 1-5, https://doi.org/10.1109/VITAE.2014.6934425 [Online]. Available.

Mamun, M.S.I., Su, C., Yang, A., Miyaji, A., Ghorbani, A., 2018. Otp-iot: an ownership
transfer protocol for the internet of things. J. Inf. Sec. Appl. 43, 73-82, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jisa.2018.10.009 [Online]. Available.

McKenna, E., Richardson, I., Thomson, M., 2012. Smart meter data: balancing consumer
privacy concerns with legitimate applications. Energy Pol. 41, 807-814.

Meidan, Y., Bohadana, M., Shabtai, A., Guarnizo, J.D., Ochoa, M., Tippenhauer, N.O.,
Elovici, Y., 2017. Profiliot: a machine learning approach for iot device identification
based on network traffic analysis. In: Proceedings of the Symposium on Applied
Computing, SAC 2017, Marrakech, Morocco, April 3-7, 2017, pp. 506-509, https: //
doi.org/10.1145/3019612.3019878 [Online]. Available.

Mendez, D.M., Papapanagiotou, I., Yang, B., 2017. Internet of things: survey on security
and privacy. vol. abs/1707.01879 CoRR. [Online]. Available http://arxiv.org/abs/
1707.01879.

Miao, J., Wang, L., 2012. Rapid identification authentication protocol for mobile nodes
in internet of things with privacy protection. JNW 7 (7), 1099-1105, https://doi.
org/10.4304/jnw.7.7.1099-1105 [Online]. Available.

Miettinen, M., Asokan, N., Nguyen, T.D., Sadeghi, A., Sobhani, M., 2014. Context-based
zero-interaction pairing and key evolution for advanced personal devices. In:
Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, Scottsdale, AZ, USA, November 3-7, 2014, pp. 880-891,
https://doi.org/10.1145/2660267.2660334 [Online]. Available.

Miettinen, M., Heuser, S., Kronz, W., Sadeghi, A.-R., Asokan, N., 2014. Conxsense:
automated context classification for context-aware access control. In: Proceedings of
the 9th ACM Symposium on Information, Computer and Communications Security.
ACM, pp. 293-304.

Miettinen, M., Marchal, S., Hafeez, I., Asokan, N., Sadeghi, A., Tarkoma, S., 2017. Iot
SENTINEL: automated device-type identification for security enforcement in iot. In:
37th IEEE International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, ICDCS 2017,
Atlanta, GA, USA, June 5-8, 2017, pp. 2177-2184, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDCS.
2017.283 [Online]. Available.

Miettinen, M., van Oorschot, P.C., Sadeghi, A., 2018. Baseline functionality for security
and control of commodity iot devices and domain-controlled device lifecycle
management. vol. abs/1808.03071 CoRR. [Online]. Available http://arxiv.org/abs/
1808.03071.

Miorandi, D., Sicari, S., Pellegrini, F.D., Chlamtac, I., 2012. Internet of things: vision,
applications and research challenges. Ad Hoc Netw. 10 (7), 1497-1516, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2012.02.016 [Online]. Available.

Moosavi, S.R., Gia, T.N., Nigussie, E., Rahmani, A., Virtanen, S., Tenhunen, H., Isoaho,
J., 2016. End-to-end security scheme for mobility enabled healthcare internet of
things. Future Generat. Comput. Syst. 64, 108-124, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
future.2016.02.020 [Online]. Available.

Moreno-Sanchez, P., Lpez, R.M., Gmez-Skarmeta, A.F., 2013. PANATIKI: a network
access control implementation based on PANA for iot devices. Sensors 13 (11),
14888-14917, https://doi.org/10.3390/s131114888 [Online]. Available.

Mosenia, A., Jha, N.K., 2017. A comprehensive study of security of internet-of-things.
IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top. Comput. 5 (4), 586-602, https://doi.org/10.1109/TETC.
2016.2606384 [Online]. Available.

Moskowitz, R., Hummen, R., 2012. Hip diet exchange (dex), draft-moskowitz-hip-dex-00
(WiP), IETF.

Motti, V.G., Mezhoudi, N., Vanderdonckt, J., 2012. Machine learning in the support of
context-aware adaptation. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Context-Aware
Adaptation of Service Front-Ends, Pisa, Italy, November 13, 2012, [Online].
Available http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-970/paper9. pdf.
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Mustafa, J., Sandstrm, K., Ericsson, N., Rizvanovic, L., 2019. Analyzing availability and
qos of service-oriented cloud for industrial iot applications. In: 24th IEEE
International Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, ETFA
2019, Zaragoza, Spain, September 10-13, 2019, pp. 1403-1406, https://doi.org/10.
1109/ETFA.2019.8869274 [Online]. Available.

Namal, S., Gamaarachchi, H., Lee, G.M., Um, T., 2015. Autonomic trust management in
cloud-based and highly dynamic iot applications. In: 2015 ITU Kaleidoscope: Trust
in the Information Society, Barcelona, Spain, December 9-11, 2015, pp. 1-8,
https://doi.org/10.1109/Kaleidoscope.2015.7383635 [Online]. Available.

Nawir, M., Amir, A., Yaakob, N., Lynn, O.B., 2016. Internet of things (iot): taxonomy of
security attacks. In: Electronic Design (ICED), 2016 3rd International Conference on.
IEEE, pp. 321-326.

Neto, A.L.M., Souza, A.L.F., Cunha, .S., Nogueira, M., Nunes, I.0., Cotta, L., Gentille, N.,
Loureiro, A.A.F., Aranha, D.F., Patil, H.K., Oliveira, L.B., 2016. Aot: authentication
and access control for the entire iot device life-cycle. In: Proceedings of the 14th
ACM Conference on Embedded Network Sensor Systems, SenSys 2016, Stanford, CA,
USA, November 14-16, 2016, pp. 1-15, https://doi.org/10.1145/2994551.2994555
[Online]. Available.

Nguyen, K.T., Laurent, M., Oualha, N., 2015. Survey on secure communication protocols
for the internet of things. Ad Hoc Netw. 32, 17-31, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
adhoc.2015.01.006 [Online]. Available.

Nguyen, T.D., Marchal, S., Miettinen, M., Dang, M.H., Asokan, N., Sadeghi, A., 2018.
Diot: a crowdsourced self-learning approach for detecting compromised iot devices.
vol. abs/1804.07474 CoRR. [Online]. Available http://arxiv.org/abs/1804.07474.

Niu, B., Zhu, X., Chi, H., Li, H., 2014. Privacy and authentication protocol for mobile
RFID systems. Wireless Pers. Commun. 77 (3), 1713-1731, https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11277-014-1605-6 [Online]. Available.

Oriwoh, E., al Khateeb, H., Conrad, M., 2016. Responsibility and non-repudiation in
resource-constrained internet of things scenarios. In: International Conference on
Computing and Technology Innovation (CTI 2015).

O’Donnell, L., 2 million iot devices vulnerable to complete takeover. threatpost.
[Online]. Available https://threatpost.com/iot-devices-vulnerable-takeover/
144167/.

Pa, Y.M.P., Suzuki, S., Yoshioka, K., Matsumoto, T., Kasama, T., Rossow, C., 2016.
Iotpot: a novel honeypot for revealing current iot threats. JIP 24 (3), 522-533,
https://doi.org/10.2197/ipsjjip.24.522 [Online]. Available.

Pal, S., Hitchens, M., Varadharajan, V., Rabehaja, T.M., 2019. Policy-based access
control for constrained healthcare resources in the context of the internet of things.
J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 139, 57-74, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2019.04.013
[Online]. Available.

Pecorella, T., Brilli, L., Mucchi, L., 2016. The role of physical layer security in iot: a
novel perspective. Information 7 (3), 49, https://doi.org/10.3390/info7030049
[Online]. Available.

Petrov, V., Edelev, S., Komar, M., Koucheryavy, Y., 2014. Towards the era of wireless
keys: how the iot can change authentication paradigm. In: IEEE World Forum on
Internet of Things, WF-IoT 2014, Seoul, South Korea, March 6-8, 2014, pp. 51-56,
https://doi.org/10.1109/WF-IoT.2014.6803116 [Online]. Available.

Plans announced to introduce new laws for internet connected devices. UK government
[Online]. Available.
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/plans-announced-to-introduce-new-law
s-for-internet-connected-devices.

Porambage, P., Schmitt, C., Kumar, P., Gurtov, A.V., Ylianttila, M., 2014. Two-phase
authentication protocol for wireless sensor networks in distributed iot applications.
In: IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, WCNC 2014,
Istanbul, Turkey, April 6-9, 2014, pp. 2728-2733, https://doi.org/10.1109/WCNC.
2014.6952860 [Online]. Available.

Porambage, P., Schmitt, C., Kumar, P., Gurtov, A.V., Ylianttila, M., 2014. Pauthkey: a
pervasive authentication protocol and key establishment scheme for wireless sensor
networks in distributed iot applications. IJDSN 10, https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/
357430 [Online]. Available.

Pularikkal, B., Patil, S., Anantha, S., Chakraborty, S., 2018. Blockchain Based Wi-Fi
Onboarding Simplification, Identity Management and Device Profiling for Iot
Devices in Enterprise Networks.

Purohit, K.C., Bisht, S., Joshi, A., Bhatt, J., 2017. Hybrid approach for securing iot
communication using authentication and data confidentiality. In: 2017 3rd
International Conference on Advances in Computing, Communication & Automation
(ICACCA) (Fall). IEEE, pp. 1-6.

Qaim, W.B., zkasap, ., 2018. DRAW: data replication for enhanced data availability in
iot-based sensor systems. In: 2018 IEEE 16th Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic
and Secure Computing, 16th Intl Conf on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, 4th
Intl Conf on Big Data Intelligence and Computing and Cyber Science and
Technology Congress, DASC/PiCom/DataCom/CyberSciTech 2018, Athens, Greece,
August 12-15, 2018, pp. 770-775, https://doi.org/10.1109/DASC/PiCom/
DataCom/CyberSciTec.2018.00133 [Online]. Available.

Qian, J., Iotseeker. [Online]. Available https://github.com/rapid7/loTSeeker.

Radware. Brickerbot results in pdos attack. [Online]. Available.
https://security.radware.com/ddos-threats-attacks/brickerbot-pdos-perma
nent-denial-of-service/.

Ramos, J.L.H., Jara, A.J., Marn, L., Skarmeta, A.F., 2013. Distributed capability-based
access control for the internet of things. J. Internet Serv. Inf. Secur. 3 (3/4), 1-16,
https://doi.org/10.22667/JISIS.2013.11.31.001 [Online]. Available.

Raza, S., Wallgren, L., Voigt, T., 2013. SVELTE: real-time intrusion detection in the
internet of things. Ad Hoc Netw. 11 (8), 2661-2674, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
adhoc.2013.04.014 [Online]. Available.

38

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Raza, S., Seitz, L., Sitenkov, D., Selander, G., 2016. S3K: scalable security with
symmetric keys - DTLS key establishment for the internet of things. IEEE Trans.
Autom. Sci. Eng. 13 (3), 1270-1280, https://doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2015.2511301
[Online]. Available.

Rescorla, E., Modadugu, N., 2012. Datagram transport layer security version 1.2. RFC
6347, 1-32, https://doi.org/10.17487/RFC6347 [Online]. Available.

Riad, K., Zhu, Y., 2017. Multi-factor synthesis decision-making for trust-based access
control on cloud. Int. J. Cooper. Inf. Syst. 26 (4), 1-33, https://doi.org/10.1142/
S0218843017500034 [Online]. Available.

Riahi, A., Challal, Y., Natalizio, E., Chtourou, Z., Bouabdallah, A., 2013. A systemic
approach for iot security. In: IEEE International Conference on Distributed
Computing in Sensor Systems, DCOSS 2013, Cambridge, MA, USA, May 20-23,
2013, pp. 351-355, https://doi.org/10.1109/DCOSS.2013.78 [Online]. Available.

Riahi, A., Natalizio, E., Challal, Y., Mitton, N., Iera, A., 2014. A systemic and cognitive
approach for iot security. In: International Conference on Computing, Networking
and Communications, ICNC 2014, Honolulu, HI, USA, February 3-6, 2014, pp.
183-188, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCNC.2014.6785328 [Online]. Available.

Rink, D.R., Swan, J.E., 1979. Product life cycle research: a literature review. J. Bus. Res.
7 (3), 219-242.

Roman, R., Najera, P., Lpez, J., 2011. Securing the internet of things. IEEE Comput. 44
(9), 51-58, https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2011.291 [Online]. Available.

Roman, R., Alcaraz, C., Lpez, J., Sklavos, N., 2011. Key management systems for sensor
networks in the context of the internet of things. Comput. Electr. Eng. 37 (2),
147-159, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2011.01.009 [Online]. Available.

Roman, R., Zhou, J., Lpez, J., 2013. On the features and challenges of security and
privacy in distributed internet of things. Comput. Network. 57 (10), 2266-2279,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2012.12.018 [Online]. Available.

Roman, R., Lpez, J.. Mambo, M., 2018. Mobile edge computing, fog etal.: a survey and
analysis of security threats and challenges. Future Generat. Comput. Syst. 78,
680-698, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2016.11.009 [Online]. Available.

Saadeh, M., Sleit, A., Qatawneh, M., Almobaideen, W., 2016. Authentication techniques
for the internet of things: a survey. In: Cybersecurity and Cyberforensics Conference
(CCC), 2016. IEEE, pp. 28-34.

Sadeghi, A., Wachsmann, C., Waidner, M., 2015. Security and privacy challenges in
industrial internet of things. pp. 54:154:6. In: Proceedings of the 52nd Annual
Design Automation Conference, San Francisco, CA, USA, June 7-11, 2015, https://
doi.org/10.1145/2744769.2747942 [Online]. Available.

Sahraoui, S., Bilami, A., 2015. Efficient hip-based approach to ensure lightweight
end-to-end security in the internet of things. Comput. Network. 91, 26-45, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2015.08.002 [Online]. Available.

Salonikias, S., Gouglidis, A., Mavridis, I., Gritzalis, D., 2019. Access control in the
industrial internet of things. In: Security and Privacy Trends in the Industrial
Internet of Things, pp. 95-114, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-12330-7_5
[Online]. Available.

Samaila, M.G., Neto, M., Fernandes, D.A., Freire, M.M., Incio, P.R., 2017. Security
challenges of the internet of things. In: Beyond the Internet of Things. Springer, pp.
53-82.

Samir, N., Gamal, Y., El-Zeiny, A.N., Mahmoud, O., Shawky, A., Saeed, A., Mostafa, H.,
2019. Energy-adaptive lightweight hardware security module using partial dynamic
reconfiguration for energy limited internet of things applications. In: IEEE
International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, ISCAS 2019, Sapporo, Japan,
May 26-29, 2019, pp. 1-4, https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCAS.2019.8702315 [Online].
Available.

Samtani, S., Yu, S., Zhu, H., Patton, M.W., Chen, H., 2016. Identifying SCADA
vulnerabilities using passive and active vulnerability assessment techniques. In: IEEE
Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics, ISI 2016, Tucson, AZ, USA,
September 28-30, 2016, pp. 25-30, https://doi.org/10.1109/1SI.2016.7745438
[Online]. Available.

Santos, B., van Thuan, D., Feng, B., Do, T.V., 2018. Identity federation for cellular
internet of things. In: Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Software
and Computer Applications, ICSCA 2018, Kuantan, Malaysia, February 08-10, 2018,
pp. 223-228, https://doi.org/10.1145/3185089.3185132 [Online]. Available.

Santos, B., Dzogovic, B., Feng, B., Do, V.T., Jacot, N., Do, T.V., 2019. Enhancing security
of cellular iot with identity federation. In: Advances in Intelligent Networking and
Collaborative Systems - the 11th International Conference on Intelligent Networking
and Collaborative Systems, INCoS 2019, Oita, Japan, September 5-7, 2019, pp.
257-268, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-29035-1_25 [Online]. Available.

Sarma, A., Giro, J., 2009. Identities in the future internet of things. Wireless Pers.
Commun. 49 (3), 353-363, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11277-009-9697-0 [Online].
Available.

Sciancalepore, S., Capossele, A., Piro, G., Boggia, G., Bianchi, G., 2015. Key management
protocol with implicit certificates for iot systems. In: Proceedings of the 2015
Workshop on IoT Challenges in Mobile and Industrial Systems, IoT-Sys@MobiSys
2015, Florence, Italy, May 18, 2015, pp. 37-42, https://doi.org/10.1145/2753476.
2753477 [Online]. Available.

Scully, P., Understanding iot security (part 2 of 3): iot cyber security for cloud and
lifecycle management. [Online]. Available
https://dzone.com/articles/understanding-iot-security-part-2-of-3-iot-c
yber-security.

M. Sethi and T. Aura, Iot security and the role of manufacturers: a story of unrealistic
design expectations.

Sfar, A.R., Natalizio, E., Challal, Y., Chtourou, Z., 2018. A roadmap for security
challenges in the internet of things. Digit. Commun. Netw. 4 (2), 118-137.
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Shivraj, V., Rajan, M., Singh, M., Balamuralidhar, P., 2015. One time password
authentication scheme based on elliptic curves for internet of things (iot). In:
Information Technology: towards New Smart World (NSITNSW), 2015 5th National
Symposium on. IEEE, pp. 1-6.

Sicari, S., Rizzardi, A., Grieco, L.A., Coen-Porisini, A., 2015. Security, privacy and trust
in internet of things: the road ahead. Comput. Network. 76, 146-164, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.comnet.2014.11.008 [Online]. Available.

Sodhro, A.H., Pirbhulal, S., Sangaiah, A.K., 2018. Convergence of iot and product
lifecycle management in medical health care. Future Generat. Comput. Syst. 86,
380-391, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2018.03.052 [Online]. Available.

Sohal, A.S., Sandhu, R., Sood, S.K., Chang, V., 2018. A cybersecurity framework to
identify malicious edge device in fog computing and cloud-of-things environments.
Comput. Secur. 74, 340-354, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2017.08.016 [Online].
Available.

Song, B., Cheong, Y., Lee, T., Jeong, J., 2017. Design and security analysis of improved
identity management protocol for 5g/iot networks. In: Recent Advances in
Information Systems and Technologies - Volume 2 [WorldCIST17, Porto Santo
Island, Madeira, Portugal, April 11-13, 2017], pp. 311-320, https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-56538-5_32 [Online]. Available.

Sulkamo, V., 2018. Iot from Cyber Security Perspective.

Sun, H., Wang, X., Buyya, R., Su, J., 2017. Cloudeyes: cloud-based malware detection
with reversible sketch for resource-constrained internet of things (iot) devices.
Software Pract. Ex. 47 (3), 421-441, https://doi.org/10.1002/spe.2420 [Online].
Available.

Suo, H., Wan, J., Zou, C., Liu, J., 2012. Security in the internet of things: a review. IEEE.
In: Computer Science and Electronics Engineering (ICCSEE), 2012 International
Conference on, vol. 3, pp. 648-651.

Tabassum, A., Erbad, A., Guizani, M., 2019. A survey on recent approaches in intrusion
detection system in iots. In: 15th International Wireless Communications & Mobile
Computing Conference, IWCMC 2019, Tangier, Morocco, June 24-28, 2019, pp.
1190-1197, https://doi.org/10.1109/IWCMC.2019.8766455 [Online]. Available.

Taneja, M., 2013. An analytics framework to detect compromised iot devices using
mobility behavior. In: International Conference on Information and Communication
Technology Convergence, ICTC 2013, Jeju Island, South Korea, 4-16 October 2013,
pp. 38-43, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICTC.2013.6675302 [Online]. Available.

Tao, F., Zuo, Y., Da Xu, L., Lv, L., Zhang, L., 2014. Internet of things and bom-based life
cycle assessment of energy-saving and emission-reduction of products. IEEE Trans.
Indust. Inform. 10 (2), 1252-1261.

Tao, F., Zuo, Y., Xu, L.D., Zhang, L., 2014. Iot-based intelligent perception and access of
manufacturing resource toward cloud manufacturing. IEEE Trans. Indust. Inform. 10
(2), 1547-1557, https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2014.2306397 [Online]. Available.

Tao, F., Wang, Y., Zuo, Y., Yang, H., Zhang, M., 2016. Internet of things in product
life-cycle energy management. J. Indust. Inform. Integr. 1, 26-39.

Tariq, N., Asim, M., Maamar, Z., Farooqi, M.Z., Faci, N., Baker, T., 2019. A mobile
code-driven trust mechanism for detecting internal attacks in sensor node-powered
iot. J. Parallel Distr. Comput. 134, 198-206, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpde.2019.
08.013 [Online]. Available.

The product life cycle. Quick MBA, internal center for management and business
administrative inc. [Online]. Available. http://www.quickmba.com/marketing/
product/lifecycle.

Thoma, M., Meyer, S., Sperner, K., Meissner, S., Braun, T., 2012. On iot-services: survey,
classification and enterprise integration. In: 2012 IEEE International Conference on
Green Computing and Communications, Conference on Internet of Things, and
Conference on Cyber, Physical and Social Computing, GreenCom/iThings/CPSCom
2012, Besancon, France, November 20-23, 2012, pp. 257-260, https://doi.org/10.
1109/GreenCom.2012.47 [Online]. Available.

Trappe, W., Howard, R.E., Moore, R.S., 2015. Low-energy security: limits and
opportunities in the internet of things. IEEE Secur. Priv. 13 (1), 14-21, https://doi.
org/10.1109/MSP.2015.7 [Online]. Available.

Tsai, I., Yu, C., Yokota, H., Kuo, S., 2017. Key management in internet of things via
kronecker product. In: 22nd IEEE Pacific Rim International Symposium on
Dependable Computing, PRDC 2017, Christchurch, New Zealand, January 22-25,
2017, pp. 118-124, https://doi.org/10.1109/PRDC.2017.25 [Online]. Available.

Tsai, Y., Wang, S., Yan, K., Chen, C., 2018. Availability enhancement in a four-layer
based iot use three-phase scheduling. J. Ambient Intell. Human. Comput. 9 (4),
1275-1291, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12652-017-0605-2 [Online]. Available.

Ukil, A., Bandyopadhyay, S., Pal, A., 2014. Iot-privacy: to be private or not to be private.
In: 2014 Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM Workshops, Toronto, ON, Canada, April
27-May 2, 2014, pp. 123-124, https://doi.org/10.1109/INFCOMW.2014.6849186
[Online]. Available.

Ukil, A., Bandyopadhyay, S., Pal, A., 2015. Privacy for iot: involuntary privacy
enablement for smart energy systems. In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on
Communications, ICC 2015, London, United Kingdom, June 8-12, 2015, pp.
536-541, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICC.2015.7248377 [Online]. Available.

Valea, E., Silva, M.D., Flottes, M., Natale, G.D., Dupuis, S., Rouzeyre, B., 2019. Providing
confidentiality and integrity in ultra low power iot devices. In: 14th International
Conference on Design & Technology of Integrated Systems in Nanoscale Era, DTIS
2019, Mykonos, Greece, April 16-18, 2019, pp. 1-6, https://doi.org/10.1109/DTIS.
2019.8735090 [Online]. Available.

Van der Elzen, I., van Heugten, J., 2017. Techniques for detecting compromised iot
devices. University of Amsterdam.

Vasseur, J., Seewald, M.G., Threat detection and mitigation for iot systems using self
learning networks (sln). presentation. Cisco. [Online]. Available
https://docbox.etsi.org/Workshop/2016/201606_SECURITYWS/S05_MITIGATINGM
ECHANISMS/CISCO_SEEWALD. pdf.

39

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Wahab, O.A., Bentahar, J., Otrok, H., Mourad, A., 2019. Resource-aware detection and
defense system against multi-type attacks in the cloud: repeated bayesian
stackelberg game. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.

Wahab, O.A., Bentahar, J., Otrok, H., Mourad, A., 2020. Optimal load distribution for
the detection of vm-based ddos attacks in the cloud. IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput. 13
(1), 114-129, https://doi.org/10.1109/TSC.2017.2694426 [Online]. Available.

Wang, A.I., Ahmad, Q.K., et al., 2010. Camf-context-aware machine learning framework
for android. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Software
Engineering and Applications (SEA 2010), CA, USA.

Wang, H., Chen, Z., Zhao, J., Di, X., Liu, D., 2018. A vulnerability assessment method in
industrial internet of things based on attack graph and maximum flow. IEEE Access
6, 8599-8609, https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2805690 [Online]. Available.

Weber, R.H., 2010. Internet of thingsnew security and privacy challenges. Comput. Law
Secur. Rep. 26 (1), 23-30.

Weif&bach, M., Taing, N., Wutzler, M., Springer, T., Schill, A., Clarke, S., 2016.
Decentralized coordination of dynamic software updates in the internet of things. In:
3rd IEEE World Forum on Internet of Things, WF-IoT 2016, Reston, VA, USA,
December 12-14, 2016, pp. 171-176, https://doi.org/10.1109/WF-IoT.2016.
7845450 [Online]. Available.

Weinzettel, J., Reenaas, M., Solli, C., Hertwich, E.G., 2009. Life cycle assessment of a
floating offshore wind turbine. Renew. Energy 34 (3), 742-747.

Wikipedia. Context aware services. [Online]. Available. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Context-aware_services.

Williams, R., McMahon, E., Samtani, S., Patton, M.W., Chen, H., 2017. Identifying
vulnerabilities of consumer internet of things (iot) devices: a scalable approach. In:
2017 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics, ISI
2017, Beijing, China, July 22-24, 2017, pp. 179-181, https://doi.org/10.1109/ISI.
2017.8004904 [Online]. Available.

Won, J., Singla, A., Bertino, E., Bollella, G., 2018. Decentralized public key
infrastructure for internet-of-things. In: 2018 IEEE Military Communications
Conference, MILCOM 2018, Los Angeles, CA, USA, October 29-31, 2018, pp.
907-913, https://doi.org/10.1109/MILCOM.2018.8599710 [Online]. Available.

Wrona, K.S., 2015. Securing the internet of things a military perspective. In: 2nd IEEE
World Forum on Internet of Things, WF-IoT 2015, Milan, Italy, December 14-16,
2015, pp. 502-507, https://doi.org/10.1109/WF-IoT.2015.7389105 [Online].
Available.

Wu, X., Cao, Q., Jin, J., Li, Y., Zhang, H., 2019. Nodes availability analysis of nb-iot
based heterogeneous wireless sensor networks under malware infection. pp.
4392839:14392839 Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput. 2019 (9), https://doi.org/
10.1155/2019/4392839 [Online]. Available.

Xie, W., Jiang, Y., Tang, Y., Ding, N., Gao, Y., 2017. Vulnerability detection in iot
firmware: a survey. In: 23rd IEEE International Conference on Parallel and
Distributed Systems, ICPADS 2017, Shenzhen, China, December 15-17, 2017, pp.
769-772, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICPADS.2017.00104 [Online]. Available.

Xin, L., Trdan, G., Datta, A., 2011. Metatrust: discriminant analysis of local information
for global trust assessment. In: 10th International Conference on Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2011), Taipei, Taiwan, May 2-6, 2011,
vols. 13, pp. 1071-1072 [Online]. Available
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id2034423&CFID69154334&CFTOKEN&45298625.

Xiong, J., Ren, J., Chen, L., Yao, Z., Lin, M., Wu, D., Niu, B., 2019. Enhancing privacy
and availability for data clustering in intelligent electrical service of iot. IEEE
Internet of Things J. 6 (2), 1530-1540, https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2018.
2842773 [Online]. Available.

Xu, L.D., He, W., Li, S., 2014. Internet of things in industries: a survey. IEEE Trans.
Indust. Inform. 10 (4), 2233-2243, https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2014.2300753
[Online]. Available.

Xu, T., Wendt, J.B., Potkonjak, M., 2014. Security of iot systems: design challenges and
opportunities. In: The IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided
Design, ICCAD 2014, San Jose, CA, USA, November 3-6, 2014, pp. 417-423,
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCAD.2014.7001385 [Online]. Available.

Xu, Y., Ren, J., Wang, G., Zhang, C., Yang, J., Zhang, Y., 2019. A blockchain-based
nonrepudiation network computing service scheme for industrial iot. IEEE Trans.
Indust. Inform. 15 (6), 3632-3641, https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2019.2897133
[Online]. Available.

Yahyaoui, A., Abdellatif, T., Attia, R., 2019. Hierarchical anomaly based intrusion
detection and localization in iot. In: 15th International Wireless Communications &
Mobile Computing Conference, IWCMC 2019, Tangier, Morocco, June 24-28, 2019,
pp. 108-113, https://doi.org/10.1109/IWCMC.2019.8766574 [Online]. Available.

Yan, B., Huang, G., 2008. Application of rfid and internet of things in monitoring and
anti-counterfeiting for products. In: Business and Information Management, 2008.
ISBIMO8. International Seminar on, vol. 1, pp. 392-395 IEEE.

Yan, T., Wen, Q., 2010. A secure mobile rfid architecture for the internet of things. In:
2010 IEEE International Conference on Information Theory and Information
Security. IEEE, pp. 616-619.

Yan, Z., Zhang, P., Vasilakos, A.V., 2014. A survey on trust management for internet of
things. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 42, 120-134, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2014.
01.014 [Online]. Available.

Yang, H., Kim, Y., 2019. Design and implementation of high-availability architecture for
iot-cloud services. Sensors 19 (15), 3276, https://doi.org/10.3390/s19153276
[Online]. Available.

Yang, Y., Cai, H., Wei, Z., Lu, H., Choo, K.R., 2016. Towards lightweight anonymous
entity authentication for iot applications. In: Information Security and Privacy - 21st
Australasian Conference, ACISP 2016, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, July 4-6, 2016,
Proceedings, Part I, pp. 265-280, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-40253-6_16
[Online]. Available.
N. Yousefnezhad et al.

Yang, Y., Wu, L., Yin, G., Li, L., Zhao, H., 2017. A survey on security and privacy issues
in internet-of-things. IEEE Internet of Things J. 4 (5), 1250-1258, https://doi.org/
10.1109/JIOT.2017.2694844 [Online]. Available.

Ye, Y., Li, T., Adjeroh, D.A., Iyengar, S.S., 2017. A survey on malware detection using
data mining techniques. pp. 41:141:40 ACM Comput. Surv. 50 (3) [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3073559.

Yeh, T., Chiu, D., Lu, K., May 2017. Persirai: new internet of things (iot) botnet targets
ip cameras. TrendLabs Secur. Intell. Blog. [Online]. Available
https://blog.trendmicro.com/trendlabs-security-intelligence/persirai-ne
w-internet-things-iot-botnet-targets-ip-cameras/.

Yousefnezhad, N., Filippov, R., Javed, A., Buda, A., Madhikermi, M., Frmling, K., 2017.
Authentication and access control for open messaging interface standard. In:
Proceedings of the 14th EAI International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous
Systems: Computing, Networking and Services, Melbourne, Australia, November
7-10, 2017, pp. 20-27, https://doi.org/10.1145/3144457.3144461 [Online].
Available.

Yousefnezhad, N., Madhikermi, M., Frmling, K., 2018. Medi: Measurement-based device
identification framework for internet of things. In: 16th IEEE International
Conference on Industrial Informatics, INDIN 2018, Porto, Portugal, July 18-20,
2018, pp. 95-100, https://doi.org/10.1109/INDIN.2018.8472080 [Online].
Available.

Zarpelo, B.B., Miani, R.S., Kawakani, C.T., de Alvarenga, S.C., 2017. A survey of
intrusion detection in internet of things. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 84, 25-37, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2017.02.009 [Online]. Available.

Zhang, G., Gong, W., 2011. The research of access control based on UCON in the
internet of things. J. SW 6 (4), 724-731, https://doi.org/10.4304/jsw.6.4.724-731
[Online]. Available.

Zhang, D., Ma, H., Liu, L., Tao, D., 2005. EAAR: an approach to environment adaptive
application reconfiguration in sensor network. In: Mobile Ad-Hoc and Sensor
Networks, First International Conference, MSN 2005, Wuhan, China, December
13-15, 2005, Proceedings, pp. 259-268, https://doi.org/10.1007/11599463_26
[Online]. Available.

Zhang, Z., Cho, M.C.Y., Wang, C., Hsu, C., Chen, C.K., Shieh, S., 2014. Iot security:
ongoing challenges and research opportunities. In: 7th IEEE International
Conference on Service-Oriented Computing and Applications, SOCA 2014, Matsue,
Japan, November 17-19, 2014, pp. 230-234, https://doi.org/10.1109/SOCA.2014.
58 [Online]. Available.

Zhang, S., Peng, J., Huang, K., Xu, X., Zhong, Z., 2017. Physical layer security in iot: a
spatial-temporal perspective. In: 9th International Conference on Wireless
Communications and Signal Processing, WCSP 2017, Nanjing, China, October 11-13,
2017, pp. 1-6, https: //doi.org/10.1109/WCSP.2017.8171138 [Online]. Available.

Zhang, G., Kou, L., Zhang, L., Liu, C., Da, Q., Sun, J., 2017. A new digital watermarking
method for data integrity protection in the perception layer of iot. pp.
3126010:13126010 Secur. Commun. Network. 2017 (12), https://doi.org/10.1155/
2017/3126010 [Online]. Available.

Zhao, K., Ge, L., 2013. A survey on the internet of things security. In: Ninth International
Conference on Computational Intelligence and Security, CIS 2013, Emei Mountain,
Sichan Province, China, December 14-15, 2013, pp. 663-667, https://doi.org/10.
1109/CIS.2013.145 [Online]. Available.

Zhao, G., Si, X., Wang, J., Long, X., Hu, T., 2011. A novel mutual authentication scheme
for internet of things. In: Modelling, Identification and Control (ICMIC), Proceedings
of 2011 International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 563-566.

40

 

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 171 (2020) 102779

Zhu, W., Yu, J., Wang, T., 2012. A security and privacy model for mobile rfid systems in
the internet of things. In: 2012 IEEE 14th International Conference on
Communication Technology. IEEE, pp. 726-732.

Hacking into internet connected light bulbs. http://www.contextis.com/resources/blog/
hacking-internet-connected-light-bulbs/, (Accessed 26 October 2019).

Use smart Doorbell to hack WiFi password. http://thehackernews.com/2016/01/
doorbell-hacking-wifi-pasword.html/, (Accessed 26 October 2019).

Narges Yousefnezhad is a PhD candidate at Aalto University
with particular interest in Internet of Things, Network Secu-
rity, and Machine Learning. Currently she works on context
awareness of sensor data in IoT platform focused on iden-
tification, authorization, and access control problems. Prior
to enrolling for doctoral study, she worked for one year as
research assistant at Aalto to the Secure Systems group headed
by Prof. N. Asokan. During this period, she worked on access
control in various networks including mobile communication
and physical interaction. She holds a master’s degree in Infor-
mation Technology (IT) Engineering, a branch of Computer
Science focuses on computer networks and security, from
Sharif University of Technology, Iran.

Avleen Malhi is a postdoc researcher in the department of
Computer Science at Aalto University since 2019. She has also
been working as Assistant Professor at Thapar University India
since 2016. She has completed her PhD in the area of infor-
mation security and her research interests include security,
IoT and machine learning. She has 16 SCIE journal publica-
tions and 20 International conferences mainly in the area of
Machine Learning, IoT and Security.

Prof. Kary Framling is working as full Professor at Umea Uni-
versity Sweden and Adjunt Professor at Aalto University Fin-
land. He is one of the first movers in the space of IoT and have
worked with many industrial partners such as BMW, Nokia etc.
He is founder of a successful startup, ControlThings. Prof. Kary
Framling is the Chairman of the IloT Work Group of The Open
Group, which published the first oT standards that address all
IoT-connected systems on October 16th, 2014: the Open Mes-
saging Interface (O-MI) and Open Data Format (O-DF). Prof.
Kary Framling is, indeed, the main architect and author of
those standards, whose potential impact for the IoT is simi-
lar to the impact of HTTP and HTML for the World Wide Web
when they were published. The project will immensely benefit
from the insights and the network that Prof. Kary Framling will
provide and he is committed to this project beyond research
and through to commercialization.
