NP} | Computational Materials

ARTICLE OPEN

www.nature.com/npjcompumats

® Check for updates

Understanding the metal-to-insulator transition in
La,_,Sr,,;CoO3_5 and its applications for neuromorphic

computing

Shenli Zhang @! and Giulia Galli@'"*"*

Transition metal oxides that exhibit a metal-to-insulator transition (MIT) as a function of oxygen vacancy concentration are
promising systems to realize energy-efficient platforms for neuromorphic computing. However, the current lack of understanding
of the microscopic mechanism driving the MIT hinders the realization of effective and stable devices. Here we investigate defective
cobaltites and we unravel the structural, electronic, and magnetic changes responsible for the MIT when oxygen vacancies are
introduced in the material. We show that, contrary to accepted views, cooperative structural distortions instead of local bonding
changes are responsible for the MIT, and we describe the subtle interdependence of structural and magnetic transitions. Finally, we
present a model, based on first principles, to predict the required electric bias to drive the transition, showing good agreement with
available measurements and providing a paradigm to establish design rules for low-energy cost devices.

npj Computational Materials (2020)6:170; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-020-00437-w

INTRODUCTION

The search for computing architectures with low-power con-
sumption is an active field of research, and neuromorphic
architectures, which aspire to mimic the human brain', have
attracted much attention lately. The realization of neuromorphic
devices imposes specific requirements on the materials to be
used: the response to an input signal should be dependent on the
signal’s intensity, frequency and the previous status of the
material, in a way similar to neurons and synapses in the brain,
which combine computation and memory in one unit. In addition,
the energy consumption to transmit and process signals should
be extremely low to be affordable on a large scale; remarkably
there are ~10'' neurons and ~10'* synapses in the brain, with a
power consumption of ~10 W for daily cognitive tasks?.

In the last decades, several transition metal oxides (TMO) have
been proposed as promising resistive switching materials*”, i.e.
systems showing tunable resistance states, induced by an external
electrical bias. These TMO exhibit a metal-to-insulator transition
(MIT) as a function of pressure, temperature, or doping, which may
be designed to mimic the behavior of neurons and synapses in
the presence of stimuli?~”.

One of such TMO is La,_,Sr,CoO3_5 (LSCO)®'°, for which a
resistivity change on the order of 10* was shown with increasing
pressure for x < 0.5 (ref. '°). This MIT process is tunable by dopants,
eg. Sr”'''?, with a change in resistivity of ~10° for x between 0
and 0.8 (refs. '*’'*). Recently, an experimental study'°? suggested to
control the MIT by tuning the oxygen vacancy concentration in
LSCO, and a topotactic transition was realized from a paramag-
netic metallic perovskite (60) to an antiferromagnetic (AFM)
semiconducting brownmillerite (BM) structure (6 = 0.5). Interest-
ingly, a similar transition was also observed between SrCoO3 and
SrCoO,5 (SCO,5)'”'” and oxygen vacancy concentrations have
been varied in multiple ways in cobaltites, e.g. by depositing
oxygen-scavenging metals'’, annealing in reducing environ-
ment'°, using electric fields'’~'? and with epitaxial strain’°.

In spite of extensive work, the mechanisms underlying the MIT in
cobaltites remain elusive, thus hampering the control of the
properties of these materials to design efficient neuromorphic
devices. Here we report an investigation of the MIT in LSCO (and
the semiconductor-to-insulator transition in LCO) using first principles
calculations; we unravel the complex interplay between structural,
electronic, and magnetic properties of the material as the transition is
driven from a perovskite to a BM phase, as a function of oxygen
vacancies. Our calculations show that cooperative, global structural
distortions leading to a decrease of the elastic energy of the solid,
which in turn are accompanied by changes in the magnetic state of
the material, are the main factors driving the MIT. Our results allow for
the identification of general descriptors to design materials for
neuromorphic computing applications, including multiple resistive
States. Finally, we present a model based on first principles to predict
the electric bias necessary to drive the MIT, which shows good
agreement with experiment, and is general and applicable to broad
classes of TMO.

RESULTS

We used a combination of electronic structure techniques based
on density functional theory (DFT) with a Hubbard correction (U).
In order to choose the most appropriate energy functional and U
parameter, we computed the structural, electronic, and magnetic
properties of the perovskite LCO and BM SCO, phases, using U
values from 3 to 7 eV and several functionals (LDA*', PBE*?, and
SCAN?*). We found that the PBE functional with U=3eV
represents the optimal choice to correctly describe most
measured properties of both phases, and we adopted the same
protocol to study the topotactic transition as a function of oxygen
vacancies. (Supplementary Discussion 1 contains a detailed study
leading to our choice of the DFT parameters, see Supplementary
Fig. 1 and Supplementary Tables 1 and 2).

 

‘Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. 7Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL, USA. *Department of Chemistry, The University

of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. “email: gagalli@uchicago.edu

Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

np} nature partner

journals
np}

S. Zhang and G. Galli

 

 

 

  

(a)

 
    

Perovskite

L

  

= _
\

, "

—

    

Fig. 1

 

     
   

©O Brownmillerite (b) Perovskite

    
  
    

   
 

Prewngente

 

 

Optimized geometries of Lao¢25Sto.375C0O3.5 as a function of oxygen vacancy concentration. a Side view of the structures at all

sampled oxygen vacancy content (shown on the bottom row, corresponding 6 value is also shown). The introduction of one oxygen vacancy
in the 40 atom perovskite cell (4.2% concentration) considered in our calculations leads to the transformation of an octahedral CoO, unit into
a pyramidal CoO; unit in a given layer (layer 4); when a second oxygen vacancy is introduced (8.3% concentration) the CoO; units are
transformed into tetrahedral CoO, ones. Upon introduction of three (12.5%) and four (16.7%) vacancies, an octahedral-to-pyramidal-to-
tetrahedral transformation is observed in alternating layers (layer 2) and eventually a topotactic transformation to a brownmillerite (BM) phase
is achieved. b Top-down view along the b-axis of the perovskite and BM structures. In the BM structure, octahedra were removed to clearly
show the rotation pattern of tetrahedra in alternating layers of the defective perovskite that led to the BM formation. The BM has Pmnb crystal
symmetry”® as the tetrahedra in alternating layers (layers 2 and 4) have opposite handed rotation (shown by curved arrows).

 

 

 

=®- LCO o?
=f LSCO 7
“o 10 =—— ref_Lo5So5CO LO
o- Ka
~ ~~~” _--a
Be
f _—-r
ane
O- T 1 T
0.0 0.2 0.4
6

 

 

 

o (») ~~~ —® LLCO

c 1605 e_ ~The —t— LSCO

vw TH He S

y SOSA
2 ”

8 150 X.

9 A

S 140- e

0 4 8 12 16

Vo concentration (%)

Fig. 2 Geometry change as a function of oxygen vacancy concentration. a Supercell volume expansion percentage (AV) as a function of
oxygen stoichiometry value 6; ref_Lao.5Sto.sCoO3 experimental data are from ref. **. b Average Co-O-Co tilt angle as a function of increasing

oxygen vacancy concentration Vo (Vo = 6/3 x 100%).

Structural transitions

We start by analyzing the structural distortions associated with the
topotactic transformation between perovskite and BM phases in
LCO and LSCO, as a function of oxygen vacancy concentrations
(Vo, including 4.2, 8.3, and 12.5%, where Vo = 6/3 x 100%). We
carried out calculations in a supercell with four layers of
octahedral units (Fig. 1), and we considered symmetry-
inequivalent oxygen vacancy positions (namely 2 configurations
at 4.2% Vo, 12 at 8.3% Vo, and 1 at 12.5% Vo), and different
magnetic states at each concentration (ferromagnetic, FM, and
several AFM states including G-AFM, A-AFM, and C-AFM) (see
Supplementary Figs. 2 and 3). We found that the lowest-energy
structure corresponds to ordered vacancies belonging to the same
layer (see Supplementary Fig. 4) and we observed a transforma-
tion from octahedral CoO, units to pyramidal CoO; and then to
tetrahedral CoO, ones within a layer; such transformations then
occurred in alternating layers, eventually leading to the BM phase.
Our results are consistent with previous in situ TEM observations,
which indicated that the perovskite to BM transition occurs as a
nucleation process of oxygen vacancies from layer to layer, in both
LCO** and Laz/3Sr1,3MnO3 (ref. *°). We also found that the
perovskite lattice expands with increasing vacancy concentration,
as shown in Fig. 2a; the same trend was observed in various
perovskite materials*? °°. Our calculations show that upon Sr
doping, the lattice expansion is less pronounced, consistent with
experimental data*’ reported for 50% Sr doping (green line in Fig.
2a). Indeed, Sr doping leads to an increase of the Co oxidation

npj Computational Materials (2020) 170

state, counterbalancing, at least in part, the effect of the vacancy’s
extra electrons. As a result, the Co 3d electrons mainly occupy the
tog manifold (see Supplementary Fig. 5 for energy diagram) and
hence the Jahn-Teller (JT) distortion following the introduction of
vacancies is smaller compared to LCO, where the e, band is
occupied. Another notable change revealed by our calculations
occurs in the Co—O-Co angle, which substantially decreases, as a
function of Vo (Fig. 2b). We expect these results to be only weakly
dependent on the distribution of Sr dopants in the crystal. For
example, we computed the structural, magnetic, and electronic
structure properties of non-defective LSCO samples as a function
of Sr and we found that the standard deviation of the calculated
lattice parameters for different Sr positions is less than 0.5% (see
Supplementary Figs. 6 and 7 and Supplementary Table 3); we also
found that all samples are FM metals, with similar magnetic
moments of the Co atoms (see Supplementary Fig. 8).

Following the analysis of ref. *° we characterized the distortions
of the perovskite phase introduced by oxygen vacancies as a
combination of JT distortions, a breathing mode of the octahedral
units and a change of the Co—O-Co tilt angle, as shown in Fig. 3.
The combined JT/breathing distortion of the octahedra is
characterized by an increase of in-plane (ac plane in Fig. 1) and
out-of-plane (along the b-axis in Fig. 1) Co—-O bond lengths, with
the latter being more pronounced (see Supplementary Tables 4
and 5 and Supplementary Fig. 9 for lattice parameters change and
bond length and bond angle change).

The Co-O-Co angle variation, or rotation distortion, is reflected
in the decrease of the angle in the out-of-plane direction, more

Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
 

Rotation Jahn-Teller

Breathing

Fig. 3 Main structural deformations occurring during the per-
ovskite to BM phase transition identified in our calculations.
Octahedral units in layers adjacent to oxygen-deficient layers
(vacancy position marked by green circle) expand as a combination
of Jahn-Teller and breathing mode distortions (expansion indicated
by arrows within the octahedra). The octahedra rotate to accom-
modate the expansion with a rotation angle Oo. Oxygen ions
connecting the octahedral and oxygen-deficient layers move as a
result of rotations, shown by the arrows on these oxygen ions. Co
ion shifts to the center of the oxygen-deficient polygons, and a
slight JT expansion in the in-plane direction occurs in the oxygen-
deficient polygons. Red spheres: oxygen ions, blue spheres: Co ions.

Perovskite

(

a) Dy
—|
< _

TU ky L 7U

(b)

  

>
x

-7U ky L T

  

np)

S. Zhang and G. Galli

 

prominent than in other directions. Such a decrease is caused
both by the rotation of octahedra and by the Co ion displacement
observed in defective polygons.

While our results on JT/breathing distortions are validated, at
least qualitatively, by the volume expansion found in experi-
29 there are no experimental measurements of the
Co-O-Co tilt angle. However, there are indirect effects of bond
angle changes that can be measured, e.g., the atomic distance
change between cations (La/Sr) in the out-of-plane direction.
When octahedra rotates, La/Sr moves closer to its neighboring
oxygen ion, thus increasing their covalent bonding strength*' and
shortening the intra-layer La(Sr)-La separation. We found that
such separation decreases (in even number rows in our cell: see
Supplementary Fig. 10), in good agreement with the experimental
trend reported for LCO”*.

In order to further understand the physical picture underlying
the distortions found in our calculations, we modeled the atomic
deformations of the perovskite using a Hamiltonian written as a
sum of three terms:

H = S- aT? + dpD? + apR?. (1)
r

In Eq. (1) the index r denotes the position of each octahedron in
the unit cell; a7, dp, and deg are the stiffness of the Jahn-Teller,
breathing, and rotation distortions and T,, D,, and R, are the
respective deformation magnitudes. We assumed dz, dp, and dp to
be site independent; they were computed as averages over all the
octahedra/polygons in the unit cell. The Hamiltonian in Eq. (1) is
written in the harmonic approximation.

Brownmillerite

0°

2.0
1.0
7U
Flay
1.15
0.9
“Ht kL 1

Fig.4 Computed stiffness E (meV A 7) of Jahn-Teller distortions in momentum space (k) with cooperative distortion effects included. a
With rotation angle O, = 0° and b With rotation angle Dp = 10° in perovskite and BM LCO. Qj is the octahedral rotation angle defined in Fig. 3,
and it is equal to the deviation of the Co—O-Co tilt angle (Fig. 2) from 180° divided by two. The color scale represents the scaled value (E/az: ay
is the Jahn-Teller stiffness parameter a; computed for the perovskite phase; see text) in the perovskite (left panels) and BM phases (right
panels). Note the different scale used for Dp = 0° and Mp = 10°, which shows the notable decrease in energy for Op = 10°. Such decrease is
more significant in the brownmillerite than in the perovskite case. L is the octahedral lattice spacing.

Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

npj Computational Materials (2020) 170
S. Zhang and G. Galli

 

 

(a) | ico

 

 

 

34 ico OF G-AFM Bap
Oo @.@e, e--- > i
Y OS re, \ aa 4p
A GD sn
5 Z ra <p local AFM, v“ rs <> LS
3 ot ws ye
1-87 42x -+4gg PP
= imi ioe a4» ty
J irm 43¢ AFM 2A
Ke non or
0O- “— magnetic ¢ > ' |
0 5 10 15 20

Vo concentration (%)

(1) { nonmagico ——SC—i@d
— _mag_LCO 9
=t 5007 “# spinpolico  fo<"

4
4

4
4
o--+
©4605  -*
> ¢—-—-0---e~___
4404 —-
0 4 8 12 16
Vo concentration (%)

Vv
cS 480-
D>

 

 

 

Fig. 5 Magnetic state change and its influence on supercell volume as a function of oxygen vacancy concentration. a Absolute, total
magnetic moment difference (AM) as a function of oxygen vacancy concentration (Vo), averaged over all Co atoms in the cell. Note that the
total magnetic moment, i.e. the subtraction of sum of the up-spin from down-spin moments, decreases; instead the absolute magnetic
moment, i.e. the sum of the absolute value of spin-up and spin-down moments, increases and the difference between these two quantities
increases. Zero corresponds to a non-magnetic (LCO) or an FM (LSCO) configuration; increasing DM leads to a transition to an AFM state.
b Supercell volume change of LCO as a function Vo for spin-polarized and non-spin-polarized (non-magnetic) configurations. The error bar at
8.3% in the spin-polarized case is the standard deviation of various oxygen vacancy configurations sampled in our calculations. The error bar
at 12.5 and 16.7% is the standard deviation of different magnetic structures sampled in our calculations.

We first estimated a; from the average vibrational frequencies of
the corresponding mode i which we obtained by carrying out ab
initio phonon calculations (using the Quantum ESPRESSO*~”> code):

a; = (Vx 2nc)*x pL. (2)

Here v is the average wave number of the ith mode and p =

,/M M2 /3 is the reduced mass; m, and m2 denote the mass of Co
and O atoms, respectively. We found that a; and dp are on the
order of 10* meV A”, while ap is two orders of magnitude smaller
(see Supplementary Table 6), indicating that the JT/breathing
distortion requires much higher energy to occur than rotations. The
small energy required to trigger these rotations stems from phonon
modes of very low energy, as identified in our phonon calculations
as well as detected experimentally**. Following the protocol of ref. *°
(see Supplementary Equations 1 and 2), we rewrote Eq. (1) by
applying specific structural constraints, so as to describe the
interaction between the JT/breathing mode and rotations. In
particular, we rewrote Eq. (1) by applying two deformation
constraints: octahedra are corner-sharing and the parallelogram
shape is assumed to be maintained. In doing so, we allowed for the
coupling between the deformation of neighboring octahedra, and
we could describe the distortions of each single octahedron using a
combination of different phonon modes. By expressing the coupled
distortions in momentum space, we could easily represent
phonon-phonon interactions. Figure 4 shows the stiffness of the
JT/breathing mode in momentum space, which includes coopera-
tive effects and thus depends on rotation. By increasing the rotation
angle ®y, the stiffness of the JT/breathing mode decreases, showing
that rotations can effectively counterbalance the elastic energy
increase caused by JT distortions. Coupling between different
distortions has been previously observed in other pervoskite
systems such as manganites® and nickelates*°. The stiffness shown
in Fig. 4 progressively decreases from the perovskite to the BM
phase, due to more facile rotations as Vo increases. Such cooperative
distortion effects occur also in the presence of Sr doping; however,
the JT/breathing distortion is less pronounced than in LCO (see Fig.
2a), and so are rotations, as expected (see Fig. 2b).

Magnetic transitions

The structural deformations described above are accompanied by
important changes in the magnetic properties of the system. With
increasing Vo, we observed a transition from a non-magnetic
structure (LCO) or FM (LSCO) to an FM-local AFM (for Vo = 4.2% and
8.3% respectively), where some of the Co atoms neighboring
oxygen vacancies give rise to an AFM state, while the surrounding
ones form an FM state. Eventually the system undergoes a transition

npj Computational Materials (2020) 170

Table 1. Comparison of computed Co-O-Co angles (degrees) in
different magnetic states (ferromagnetic, FM, and antiferromagnetic,
AFM) in the brownmillerite (BM) phase of LCO, compared to the
perovskite phase (bottom row).

BM Co-O-Co tetra
(in plane)

Co-O-Co out
of plane

Co-O-Co octa
(in plane)
G-AFM 114.5
FM 118.27
173.5

153.8
156.35
155.6
159.7

138.9
139.48
158.75
159.7

Non-magnetic
Perovskite N/A

 

to a complete AFM phase. Note that in the spin-polarized case,
where one has partially filled d orbitals (full occupation of majority
spin channel and partially filled minority spin channel), the super-
exchange interaction between Co—O-Co with almost 180°, favors
AFM ordering, according to Goodenough—Kanamori-Anderson
rules. In turn this ordering implies lower Co—-O orbital hybridization
and longer Co-O bond length, consistent with a previous study on
SrCoO3 (ref. *”). As shown in Fig. 5a, the absolute and total magnetic
moment differences increase, consistent with the decrease in total
magnetic moment observed in experiments'°. Our results are also
consistent with those of previous theoretical and experimental
studies that reported different magnetic states at different vacancy
concentrations’”**. For example, in strained LCO epitaxial film with
11.1% ordered vacancy concentration, first-principle calculations*®
predicted a local AFM structure developing next to vacancies
embedded in an FM environment.

Interestingly, if we constrain the system to be non-magnetic (a
configuration which is less energetically favorable than that of a
magnetic state), we do not observe any volume expansion (see
Fig. 5b) or any increase in the Co-O bond length, indicating that
the combined JT/breathing distortions are suppressed. This result
can be understood noting that the Co 3d-O 2p hybridization is
higher (see Supplementary Figs. 11 and 12 of PDOS), thus leading
to a shorter Co-O bond length®’”. As a consequence, the changes
of angles in the layer with tetrahedral units and in the out-of-plane
direction are greatly suppressed: the out-of-plane Co—O-Co angle
is the same as in the perovskite phase, and the in-plane Co-O-Co
angle in tetrahedral units approaches 180° (see Table 1), indicating
that rotations are inhibited. If the system is instead constrained in
a FM state, we observed only a slight modification of the
deformation compared to that in the ground state; the volume
expansion is within the error bar of our calculations at Vo = 16.7%

Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
S. Zhang and G. Galli

np)

 

 

(a)

 

   

S -e- LCO ~
@ 1.575 -% Lsco J
_ /
2
o 1.0- o
D 7
a
2 0.55 a ~
2 ~s ~
0.0-
0 4 8 12 16
Vo concentration (%)
(b) —TotalDOS Mmm O 2p mMllOctahedralCo_3d mlllPyramidal Co_3d Mill Tetrahedral Co_3d

 

 

DOS (arb. Units)

 

 

a 4 7 e l
exer 77 o7 \ i 9 4
x/ &g | (SEE bey I
e (ey! I ile i
x rc SE toy | W778 1

exon ee = &s
: i Soee t

2
LCO exe pte 73!
z ~~ ee ee ee

r----“f eat

I-— &y | ‘ qe
SHH I at 74,
Lay 29 | HET dy I

 

 

Le — 9 x2-y2_!

 

 

Vo

Fig. 6 Electronic structures change as a function of oxygen vacancy concentration. a Band gap variation as a function of vacancy
concentration Vo. b Density of states (DOS) of LCO as a function of Vo, showing the band gap opening. The total DOS is further decomposed
into projected DOS including the 2p orbitals of oxygen atoms, and the 3d orbitals of octahedral Co, pyramidal Co, and tetrahedral Co atoms.
c The corresponding oxygen-deficient structures and Co spin configurations. The color of the dashed border corresponds to the color legend
in b and it is used to distinguish Co with different oxygen coordination. High-spin and low-spin octahedral Co is also distinguished (see
Supplementary Fig. 15 for magnetic moment of each Co). Pink arrow represents increased valence electrons in the 3d orbital caused by
oxygen vacancies (due to both extra valence electrons from the oxygen vacancy as well as the decreases charge transfer from Co to O, see

more explanation in the main text).

(see Fig. 5b), and the Co—O-Co angle is just slightly larger (<3%)
than in the ground state (see Table 1).

Metal-insulator transition

The structural and magnetic transitions identified as a function of
increasing Vo are responsible for the MIT (Fig. 6a) found in our
calculations and observed in experiments in the case of LSCO'°,
and for the semiconductor-to-insulator transition in the case of
LCO. We emphasize that the MIT is intimately connected to the
magnetic state transition described above (see Fig. 5a). Note that
doping LCO with Sr decreases the band gap, consistent with
Cheng et al.’s'* results obtained by combining experiments and
DFT calculations; in LSCO the band gap opening is first observed
at a higher Vo than in LCO, and in both cases it is clearly
associated with the FM-to-AFM transition point. The trends in the
density of states (DOS) as a function of Vo shown in Fig. 6b reveals
in detail how the electronic structure of the system evolves (DOS
for LSCO data is shown in Supplementary Fig. 13). Interestingly, a
gap opens up first between states associated to oxygen-deficient
layers. As oxygen vacancies are added to alternating layers, states
originating from oxygen-deficient Co ions (i.e. from Co less than
sixfold coordinated) as well as from neighboring octahedral Co are
increasingly more localized. This finding is supported by the
analysis of Born effective charge (see Supplementary Table 8),
which shows that the charge transfer from Co to O decreases with
increasing Vo, and it is consistent with the observed decrease of
the dielectric constant. Furthermore, we observed that the band

Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

gap increases as a function of structural deformations leading to
pyramidal and then tetrahedral coordination. The main contribu-
tion to band edge states (see Supplementary Fig. 11) originates
from the octahedral Co’s eg manifold (majority spin channel) for
Vo < 8.3 %; as Vo increases, the main contribution comes from the
pyramidal Co’s e, manifold (majority spin channel) for Vo = 12.5%,
and from the minority spin channel of Co for Vo = 16.7%, with
contributions from each d orbital of either octahedral Co or
tetrahedral Co. These results highlight the importance of
configurational as well as valence state changes for a band gap
to develop in the system.

A detailed Co spin configuration analysis (Fig. 6c and see
Supplementary Table 7 and Supplementary Fig. 15 for details)
reveals how the electronic structure of the system is related to
structural deformations and magnetic state change. We found
that the crystal field splitting of oxygen-deficient Co depends not
only on the oxygen vacancy configuration but also on the spin
configuration of neighboring octahedral sites. For example, the
spin-up pyramidal Co site present at Vo =4.2% experiences an
octahedral crystal field splitting with six valence electrons,
resembling that of its neighboring octahedral Co site; the spin-
down pyramidal Co site exhibits instead a pyramidal crystal field
splitting and seven electrons. This indicates that the effect of
oxygen vacancies on the electronic structure is not a local effect.
In a consistent fashion, the variation in the number of electrons
belonging to the 3d orbitals of Co caused by oxygen vacancies
(see Fig. 6c) occurs not only in oxygen-deficient layers but also in
neighboring octahedral layers. To understand this variation in

npj Computational Materials (2020) 170
S. Zhang and G. Galli

 

 

 

 

 

S a
&
VU 1.05
y —e LCO
Qo.
80.65
T T T
5 10 Ls

Vo concentration (%)

(b)

x10°

 

 

 

 

=@  LCO Eac =@®— average V

“™ LCO_Eb hw
O=-4 1 I T =0.0

0 a 10 Lo

Vo concentration (%)

Fig. 7 Computed free energy of formation of oxygen vacancies in LCO and LSCO, and the electric field required to trigger their
formation. a Computed free energy of formation (Fya-) per oxygen vacancy as a function of oxygen vacancy content Vo for LCO and LSCO.
b Computed applied electric field and the corresponding voltage required to trigger an electrochemical reaction as a function of Vo in LCO
(see text). The voltage is averaged over different directions. Dotted and dashed lines in black represent the induced electric field (E) computed
from the maximum vacancy free energy shown in b. a, b, and c denote the unit cell axis of LCO.

number of electrons, it is important to consider the contribution of
charge from oxygen vacancies as well as the decrease of electron
transfer from Co to O due to an increase in electron localization of
the Co orbitals. The charge variation at oxygen-deficient Co sites is
mainly due to the extra electrons, while electron localization
influences the charge at octahedral sites the most, and more so for
low-spin state Co than spin-polarized one. The relative importance
of these effects (extra charges and decrease in electron transfer
due to localization) depends on Vo, and in the BM phase, both
effects contribute equally to determine the electronic structure of
tetrahedral and octahedral Co sites. The increase in number of
electrons leads to transitions from LS to HS or IS spin states at
octahedral Co sites, and triggers JT/breathing distortions in layers
with octahedral sites, followed by rotations to decrease the elastic
energy. The final, stable spin configurations, magnetic structures,
and structural distortions are thus the result of a global
redistribution of the electrons in the lowest-energy configurations
of the system. This redistribution is influenced both by the oxygen
vacancy configuration and by their concentration. Hence the
materials electronic structure is intimately connected to the
magnetic state transition and to structural deformations.

In addition, we note that in the projected DOS, a fairly large gap
is present between states associated with oxygen-deficient layers,
as soon as oxygen vacancies are introduced in the system,
indicating that electron correlation increases at oxygen-deficient
Co sites. The gap between states associated to octahedral layers
decreases when a small amount of vacancies is introduced, as it is
related to extra electrons occupying the eg orbitals. However, as
the concentration of Vo increases, the effect of correlation
between electrons at octahedral Co sites increases as well,
eventually leading to the opening of a gap. The presence of Sr
partially compensates the electron doping effect from oxygen
vacancies; hence, correlation effects are expected to be weaker
and likely weakly influenced by an increase in oxygen vacancy
concentration, as reflected by less significant structural distortions
and smaller band gap changes in LSCO than in LCO.

To further understand how electronic correlation is affected by
the magnetic state and associated structural deformations in the
material, we carried out calculations by constraining LCO to be in
specific magnetic states, corresponding to structural distortions
different from those observed in the ground state (see Supple-
mentary Fig. 12). We found that when the system is constrained to
be non-magnetic, the band gap vanishes instead of increasing.
The projected DOS shows that the band gap closure is mainly due
to the energy levels arising from oxygen-deficient Co moving
closer to the Fermi level. Note that in the absence of spin
polarization (see Supplementary Fig. 12a), tetrahedral and
octahedral Co sites exhibit the same crystal field splitting and
hence one observes a decrease in electron correlation relative to
the spin-polarized case. When constraining the system in an FM

npj Computational Materials (2020) 170

state, we observed instead a finite, albeit smaller band gap, and
the difference compared to the AFM ground state (Fig. 6b) is
mainly in the localization of the states; in particular, the band
stemming from tetrahedrally coordinated Co ions is less localized
than in the ground state. Overall our results indicate that due to
spin polarization, especially in the presence of AFM ordering, the
oxygen-deficient Co sites experience a crystal field splitting
different from the one of the octahedral sites, leading to an
increase in localization of the d orbitals and thus to an increase in
correlation. As a result, defect states introduced by oxygen
vacancies are pushed well inside the valence band of the material,
thus allowing for a band gap to open.

We further analyzed the effect of structural distortions on the
band gap by constraining the angle of the G-AFM BM LCO
structure to be close to the value it has in the initial perovskite
structure (160° of all Co-O-Co angle). Lattice expansion was
allowed in order to stabilize the G-AFM state. We found that the
hybridized octahedral Co 3d—O 2p energy levels moved upwards,
towards the Fermi level. The crystal field splitting of tetrahedral Co
sites becomes similar to the octahedral case, showing the tight link
between the system’s crystal field splitting and rotation distortions.
These results suggest that lattice expansion alone cannot lead to
an MIT, and that rotation is a key factor for the opening of the band
gap. Hence in order to have a complete opening of the gap all
elements identified here—volume expansion, rotation, and asso-
ciated magnetic state change— are essential.

From mechanisms to devices

We close by discussing the impact of our results on device
applications. Experiments have demonstrated that applying
electric fields'’, e.g. by the ion-gel gating method?’”’, is a
promising way to control Vo in LSCO and in other perovskite
materials such as nickelate where a synaptic behavior was
generated by electrical stimuli”; hence it is interesting to estimate
the required applied potential to modulate the vacancy concen-
tration. The field applied to a non-metallic material (Eg) can be
evaluated using the following equation:

(2e~° — 1)E
2E~

Polar

E,o=E )
0 + 2EQE

(3)
where E is the induced field, Ppotar is the permanent polarization
vector (which is zero for the non-defective perovskite phase of
LCO, but non zero in the presence of defects); €° is the long-
wavelength dielectric constant of the system and Eq. (3) is derived
by assuming that the ionic and electronic components of the
induced polarization are approximately the same (see Supple-
mentary Discussion 6). Indeed, we know from experiments that
the zero-frequency dielectric constant of LCO is about twice as €*°*'.
We computed €*using density functional perturbation theory

Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
(DFPT) and Poolar using the Berry phase approach. We obtained
the ith component of E as E;=n/d; where dj; is a supercell unit
length and n is the electrochemical potential necessary to trigger
the perovskite to BM phase transition. We computed n by
requiring that vacancies can form spontaneously, i.e. that the
oxygen vacancy free energy formation (Fya.) equals to zero; this
requirement yields the condition: |n| =43x Pe where Fyac was
obtained by adding to the total energy of formation a vibrational
free energy contribution computed from phonon frequencies (see
Supplementary Equation 6). Figure 7a reports F,,-/n (free energy
per vacancy) as a function of Vo for both LCO and LSCO. To
estimate the electrochemical potential required for a complete
perovskite to BM phase transition, we considered the highest
value of F,,/n, yielding |n|=0.6V for LCO and 0.4V for LSCO,
respectively. We found that Sr doping generally decreases F,,4./n
by ~0.4-0.5 eV relative to LCO, thus leading to a lower value of |n].
These results indicate that Sr-Vo segregation may occur during
the topotactic transformation as the Vo formation energy is
lowered with Sr doping; however, we do not expect that a lower
oxygen vacancy formation energy will affect the MIT mechanism
described earlier, since also in the case of 100% segregation (i.e.,
SCO3_5), a similar MIT transition has been shown to occur'®?’,
accompanied by an FM-to-AFM change during the perovskite to
BM topotactic transition. We also note that the energy required to
create oxygen vacancies is higher than that of the barrier for
oxygen diffusions (the migration enthalpy in LCO is estimated to
be ~0.7 eV from DFT+U calculations** and experiments~’); thus,
the diffusion process is unlikely to be the bottleneck of topotactic
phase transitions.

In Fig. 7b, we show the applied electric field E, and the
corresponding voltage as a function of Vo assuming the maximum
value of n computed above. Applying an electric field along the
out-of-plane axis b leads to the lowest polarization value in the
material and thus minimizes the difference between E, and E.
The upper limit of the voltage corresponding to Ey averaged along
the three axes is estimated to be ~1.2 V for LCO (at Vo = 8.3%) and
0.8 V for LSCO (at Vo = 12.5%). The latter value is approximate, as it
was obtained by assuming the same polarization for LsCO and LCO
at 12.5% Vo, and considering the value of n computed for LSCO.

The voltage estimated in our calculations is a promising value,
qualitatively similar to that found experimentally (0.5 V) to trigger
a lattice expansion in 50% Sr-doped LCO films by the introduction
of oxygen vacancies~”. It is a value comparable to the operation
voltage (0.8 V) in VO2-based artificial neurons, which is considered
low** compared to that of CMOS-based neurons. A typical CMOS
component requires a minimum operating voltage around 0.5 V,
while a CMOS implementation of a neuron typically requires eight
or more active components, thus leading to an increase of the
total energy consumption**. Moreover, for an onset of the MIT or a
transformation between different resistive states, a complete
perovskite to BM phase transition is not necessary; therefore, a
small variation of Vo near the transition point suffices, e.g., near
Vo = 8.3% in LCO, which would further decrease the required
potential value by ~0.14V, due to a smaller value of Fyac per
vacancy. Varying the Sr concentration may also help modulate the
required potential, which we find decreases the upper bound by
0.4 V for Sr = 37.5%. In fact, in the 100% Sr case (SCO,), the relative
stability of the perovskite and BM phases is reversed and a voltage
of only 30 mV is found to be necessary to trigger the topotactic
phase transition'’.

DISCUSSION

Using a series of first principles calculations, we characterized, at
the microscopic level, the MIT in La,_,Sr,CoO3_5 (x=0O and
X = 0.375) as a function of oxygen vacancy concentration (6 from 0 to
0.5). We found that the introduction of oxygen vacancies in the

Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

S. Zhang and G. Galli

np)

 

perovskite phase of LCO and LSCO lead to structural distortions,
accompanied by a change of the magnetic state of the material and
of the Co ion’s oxidation state. In particular, in LCO (LSCO) we
observed a non-magnetic (FM) to AFM transition during the topotactic
perovskite to BM transformation. Importantly, when constraining the
system to be non-magnetic, all structural distortions, including the
combined JT/breathing distortions and rotations, are suppressed, thus
preventing a transition to an insulating state. We identified several
structural transition pathways from the perovskite to the BM, with the
lowest-energy pathway well separated (~0.8 eV per vacancy lower)
from other metastable pathways. We found that the combined JT/
breathing distortions lead to a localization of states near oxygen-
deficient Co ions and thus an increased electron correlation effect,
enabling the opening of a band gap between states associated to
oxygen-deficient layers; the rotations triggered to lower the elastic
energy of the system are further responsible for the opening of the
gap between states connecting octahedral and tetrahedral layers,
eventually leading to an MIT. We also showed that the band gap may
be tuned by regulating the oxygen vacancy concentration, which is a
necessary prerequisite to form different resistive states. These findings
are consistent with the experimentally measured resistivity increase in
the material, as a function of oxygen vacancy concentration and can
be further validated by future optical measurements. We emphasize
that in order to have a complete opening of the gap upon
introduction of vacancies, all elements identified in our calculations—
volume expansion, lattice distortions, and associated magnetic state
change—are essential. The cooperative distortions predicted in our
calculations, in particular the rotations of Co-oxygen units may be
probed by X-ray and TEM measurements. It is interesting to note that
the microscopic mechanism identified here in LSCO differ from that
reported for the MIT in defective nickelates*’. In nickelates, local
electronic structure changes arising from excess electron in different
crystal field splitting environments of the Ni ions can explain the band
gap opening, in the absence of magnetic state changes and
cooperative structural distortions.

Finally, we showed that the topotactic transformation in LCO
and LSCO may be induced by an application of an electric field of
the order of that found experimentally, and we presented a
general model applicable to broad classes of TMOs. We note that a
similar non-volatile resistive switching process may also be
triggered in VO; (ref. *°), a broadly studied TMO for neuromorphic
applications**”. However, in this case the Fermi level is moved to
the conduction band*® as soon as vacancies are formed, and no
intermediate resistive states may be created. In addition, in LSCO
the formation of oxygen-deficient layers during the topotactic
transformation facilitates the migration of oxygen ions*”°, which
in turn increases the switching speed from a metal to an insulator,
relative to vanadium oxide compounds.

The results obtained here, especially the interplay between
structural, electronic, and magnetic properties identified in our
calculations, fully characterize the MIT for the first time, and may
be used to engineer specific resistive states in cobaltite films, e.g.,
by interfacial heterostructures’' and by controlling strain effects. It
is well known that strain plays a key role in the presence of
interfaces*°°*>*. the combined structural and magnetic effects
identified in our calculations may thus be used to engineer
interfaces with desired properties for neuromorphic applications
in cobaltites and likely manganites as well??, and in general to
understand topotactic transformations in several classes of TMOs.

METHODS
DFT+U calculation parameters

We used DFT, the PBE generalized gradient approximation with a Hubbard
U correction and the projected augmented wave PP from PSlibrary”°,
and performed calculations using Quantum ESPRESSO (QE) code (V6.2
and V6.4.1)°**?. To obtain the ground state structures for different vacancy
concentrations and La/Sr ratios, a 2x 4x /2 perovskite supercell (La

npj Computational Materials (2020) 170
Np)

S. Zhang and G. Galli

 

(Sr)gCogOz4, 40 atoms) was used, which was then optimized for each
configurations within the orthorhombic lattice symmetry, using a plane-
wave cutoff of 90Ry and a 6xX3x6 Monkhorst-Pack k-point grid. Sr
doping positions were determined by sampling all symmetry-inequivalent
positions as A-site cation (see Supplementary Fig. 6).

DATA AVAILABILITY

Data that support the findings of this study will be available through the Qresp””
curator.

Received: 31 May 2020; Accepted: 11 October 2020;
Published online: 10 November 2020

REFERENCES

1.

10.

11.

12.
13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.

npj Computational Materials (2020) 170

Grollier, J., Guha, S., Ohno, H. & Schuller, |. K. Preface to special topic: new physics
and materials for neuromorphic computation. J. Appl. Phys. 124, 151801 (2018).

. Jeong, D. S., Kim, K. M., Kim, S., Choi, B. J. & Hwang, C. S. Memristors for energy-

efficient new computing paradigms. Adv. Electron. Mater. 2, 1600090 (2016).

. Ramanathan, S. Quantum materials for brain sciences and artificial intelligence.

MRS Bull. 43, 534-540 (2018).

. Wang, Z. et al. Resistive switching materials for information processing. Nat. Rev.

Mater. 5, 1-23 (2020).

. Li, Y., Wang, Z., Midya, R., Xia, Q. & Yang, J. J. Review of memristor devices in

neuromorphic computing: materials sciences and device challenges. J. Phys. D
Appl. Phys. 51, 503002 (2018).

. del Valle, J., Ramirez, J. G., Rozenberg, M. J. & Schuller, |. K. Challenges in materials

and devices for resistive-switching-based neuromorphic computing. J. Appl. Phys.
124, 211101 (2018).

. Sawa, A. Resistive switching in transition metal oxides. Mater. Today 11, 28-36

(2008).

. Vanko, G., Rueff, J.-P., Mattila, A., Németh, Z. & Shukla, A. Temperature- and

pressure-induced spin-state transitions in LaCoO3. Phys. Rev. B 73, 024424 (2006).

. Mastin, J., Einarsrud, M.-A. & Grande, T. Structural and thermal properties of Lay.

xor,CoO3_5. Chem. Mater. 18, 6047-6053 (2006).

Lengsdorf, R. et al. Pressure-induced insulating state in (La,Sr)CoO3. Phys. Rev. B
69, 140403 (2004).

Louca, D., Sarrao, J. L., Thompson, J. D., Roder, H. & Kwei, G. H. Correlation of local
Jahn-Teller distortions to the magnetic/conductive states of La,,Sr,CoO3. Phys.
Rev. B 60, 10378-10382 (1999).

Mineshige, A. et al. Crystal structure and metal-insulator transition of La,
_,Sr,CoO3. J. Solid State Chem. 121, 423-429 (1996).

Wu, J. & Leighton, C. Glassy ferromagnetism and magnetic phase separation in
La, — ,Sr,CoO3. Phys. Rev. B 67, 174408 (2003).

Cheng, X. et al. Oxygen evolution reaction on La,_,Sr,CoO3 perovskites: a com-
bined experimental and theoretical study of their structural, electronic, and
electrochemical properties. Chem. Mater. 27, 7662-7672 (2015).

Gilbert, D. A. et al. lonic tuning of cobaltites at the nanoscale. Phys. Rev. Mater. 2,
104402 (2018).

Jeen, H. et al. Reversible redox reactions in an epitaxially stabilized SrCoO,, oxy-
gen sponge. Nat. Mater. 12, 1057-1063 (2013).

Lu, Q. & Yildiz, B. Voltage-controlled topotactic phase transition in thin-film
SrCoO, monitored by in situ X-ray diffraction. Nano Lett. 16, 1186-1193
(2016).

Walter, J., Wang, H., Luo, B., Frisbie, C. D. & Leighton, C. Electrostatic versus
electrochemical doping and control of ferromagnetism in ion-gel-gated ultrathin
Lag5Sfo.5C0O3_5. ACS Nano 10, 7799-7810 (2016).

Lu, N. et al. Electric-field control of tri-state phase transformation with a selective
dual-ion switch. Nature 546, 124-128 (2017).

Gazquez, J. et al. Lattice mismatch accommodation via oxygen vacancy ordering
in epitaxial Lag sSrg.5CoO3-5 thin films. APL Mater. 1, 012105 (2013).

Perdew, J. P. & Zunger, A. Self-interaction correction to density-functional
approximations for many-electron systems. Phys. Rev. B 23, 5048-5079 (1981).
Perdew, J. P., Burke, K. & Ernzerhof, M. Generalized gradient approximation made
simple. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865-3868 (1996).

Sun, J., Ruzsinszky, A. & Perdew, J. P. Strongly constrained and appropriately
normed semilocal density functional. Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 036402 (2015).

Jang, J. H. et al. In situ observation of oxygen vacancy dynamics and ordering in
the epitaxial LaCoO3 system. ACS Nano 11, 6942-6949 (2017).

Yao, L., Inkinen, S. & van Dijken, S. Direct observation of oxygen vacancy-driven
structural and resistive phase transitions in Laz/3Sr;/3MnO3. Nat. Commun. 8, 1-9
(2017).

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

AA,

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

Adler, S. B. Chemical expansivity of electrochemical ceramics. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
84, 2117-2119 (2001).

Marrocchelli, D., Perry, N. H. & Bishop, S. R. Understanding chemical expansion in
perovskite-structured oxides. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 17, 10028-10039 (2015).
Zuev, A. Y. U., Vylkov, A. |, Petrov, A. N. & Tsvetkov, D. S. Defect structure and
defect-induced expansion of undoped oxygen deficient perovskite LaCoO3_ 5.
Solid State lon. 179, 1876-1879 (2008).

Walter, J. et al. lon-gel-gating-induced oxygen vacancy formation in epitaxial
Lag. 5Sto.sCoO3_5 films from in operando x-ray and neutron scattering. Phys. Rev.
Mater. 1, 071403 (2017).

Guzman-Verri, G. G., Brierley, R. T. & Littlewood, P. B. Cooperative elastic fluc-
tuations provide tuning of the metal-insulator transition. Nature 576, 429-432
(2019).

Pavarini, E., Yamasaki, A., Nuss, J. & Andersen, O. K. How chemistry controls
electron localization in 3d' perovskites: a Wannier-function study. N. J. Phys. 7,
188 (2005).

Giannozzi, P. et al. QUANTUM ESPRESSO: a modular and open-source software
project for quantum simulations of materials. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 21, 395502
(2009).

Giannozzi, P. et al. Advanced capabilities for materials modelling with Quantum
ESPRESSO. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 29, 465901 (2017).

Ishikawa, A., Nohara, J. & Sugai, S. Raman study of the orbital-phonon coupling in
LaCoO3. Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 136401 (2004).

Lee, J. H., Delaney, K. T., Bousquet, E., Spaldin, N. A. & Rabe, K. M. Strong coupling
of Jahn-Teller distortion to oxygen-octahedron rotation and_ functional
properties in epitaxially strained orthorhombic LaMnO3. Phys. Rev. B 88, 174426
(2013).

Mercy, A., Bieder, J., [Aiguez, J. & Ghosez, P. Structurally triggered metal-insulator
transition in rare-earth nickelates. Nat. Commun. 8, 1677 (2017).

Lim, J. & Yu, J. Role of oxygen vacancy in the spin-state change and magnetic
ordering in SrCoO3_5. Phys. Rev. B 98, 085106 (2018).

Biskup, N. et al. Insulating ferromagnetic LaCoO3_5 films: a phase induced by
ordering of oxygen vacancies. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 087202 (2014).

Lu, Q. et al. Bi-directional tuning of thermal transport in SrCoO, with electro-
chemically induced phase transitions. Nat. Mater. 19, 1-8 (2020).

Shi, J., Ha, S. D., Zhou, Y., Schoofs, F. & Ramanathan, S. A correlated nickelate
synaptic transistor. Nat. Commun. 4, 1-9 (2013).

Schmidt, R. Wu, J., Leighton, C. & Terry, |. Dielectric response to the low-
temperature magnetic defect structure and spin state transition in polycrystalline
LaCoO3. Phys. Rev. B 79, 125105 (2009).

Ritzmann, A. M., Pavone, M., Mufhoz-Garcia, A. B., Keith, J. A. & Carter, E. A. Ab
initio DFT+U analysis of oxygen transport in LaCoO;;: the effect of Co** magnetic
states. J. Mater. Chem. A 2, 8060-8074 (2014).

Ishigaki, T., Yamauchi, S., Mizusaki, J., Fueki, K. & Tamura, H. Tracer diffusion
coefficient of oxide ions in LaCoO3 single crystal. J. Solid State Chem. 54, 100-107
(1984).

Lin, J. et al. Low-voltage artificial neuron using feedback engineered insulator-to-
metal-transition devices. In 2016 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting
(IEDM), San Francisco, CA, USA 34.5.1-34.5.4 (2016).

Kotiuga, M. et al. Carrier localization in perovskite nickelates from oxygen
vacancies. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 116, 21992-21997 (2019).

Jeong, J. et al. Suppression of metal-insulator transition in VOz by electric
field-induced oxygen vacancy formation. Science 339, 1402-1405 (2013).

Yang, Z., Ko, C. & Ramanathan, S. Oxide electronics utilizing ultrafast metal-
insulator transitions. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 41, 337-367 (2011).

Chen, L. et al. First-principles study of the effect of oxygen vacancy and strain on
the phase transition temperature of VO. RSC Adv. 6, 86872-86879 (2016).
Mitra, C., Meyer, T., Lee, H. N. & Reboredo, F. A. Oxygen diffusion pathways in
brownmillerite SrCoO, 5: influence of structure and chemical potential. J. Chem.
Phys. 141, 084710 (2014).

Zhang, Q. et al. Atomic-resolution imaging of electrically induced oxygen vacancy
migration and phase transformation in SrCoO25.5. Nat. Commun. 8, 1-6 (2017).
Lee, S. et al. Strong orbital polarization in a cobaltate-titanate oxide hetero-
structure. Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 117201 (2019).

Yang, H. W. et al. Anomalous magnetism in strained La;.,Sr,CoO3 epitaxial films
(0 < x < 0.5). Sci. Rep. 4, 1-7 (2014).

Rondinelli, J. M. & Spaldin, N. A. Structure and properties of functional oxide thin
films: insights from electronic-structure calculations. Adv. Mater. 23, 3363-3381
(2011).

Lee, J. H. & Rabe, K. M. Coupled magnetic-ferroelectric metal-insulator transition
in epitaxially strained SrCoO3 from first principles. Phys. Rev. B 107, 067601
(2011).

Zhou, Y., Kouser, S., Borisevich, A. Y., Pantelides, S. T. & May, S. J. Evidence for
interfacial octahedral coupling as a route to enhance magnetoresistance in
perovskite oxide superlattices. Adv. Mater. Interfaces 7, 1901576 (2020).

Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
56. Dal Corso, A. Pseudopotentials periodic table: from H to Pu. Comput. Mater. Sci.
95, 337-350 (2014).

57. Govoni, M. et al. Qresp, a tool for curating, discovering and exploring repro-
ducible scientific papers. Sci. Data 6, 190002 (2019).

58. Parsons, T. G. D’Hondt, H., Hadermann, J. & Hayward, M. A. Synthesis and
structural characterization of La,;_, A, MnO2z5 (A=Ba, Sr, Ca) phases: mapping the
variants of the brownmillerite structure. Chem. Mater. 21, 5527-5538 (2009).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research was conducted as part of the Quantum Materials for Energy Efficient
Neuromorphic Computing, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the US
Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences under award DE-
$C0019273. We thank Shaobo Cheng, Peter Littlewood, Chris Leighton, Shriram
Ramanathan, Yayoi Takamura, Wennie Wang, and Yimei Zhu for many useful
discussions and comments on the manuscript. This research used computational
resources of the University of Chicago’s Research Computing Center and at the National
Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC), a DOE Office of Science User
Facility supported by the Office of Science of the US Department of Energy.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Both authors designed the research and wrote the manuscript. S.Z. performed all
calculations.

COMPETING INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing interests.

Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

S. Zhang and G. Galli

np)

 

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
$41524-020-00437-w.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to GG.

Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons

EY Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.

© The Author(s) 2020

npj Computational Materials (2020) 170

9
