NP] | Digital Medicine

AUTHOR CORRECTION OPEN

www.nature.com/npjdigitalmed

® Check for updates

Author Correction: PENet—a scalable deep-learning model
for automated diagnosis of pulmonary embolism using

volumetric CT imaging

Shih-Cheng Huang @®, Tanay Kothari, Imon Banerjee@®, Chris Chute, Robyn L. Ball, Norah Borus, Andrew Huang, Bhavik N. Patel,
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jeremy Irvin, Jared Dunnmon, Joseph Bledsoe, Katie Shpanskaya, Abhay Dhaliwal, Roham Zamanian,

Andrew Y. Ng and Matthew P. Lungren

npj Digital Medicine (2020)3:102; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41 746-020-003 10-6

Correction to: npj Digital Medicine https://doi.org/10.1038/s41 746-
020-0266-y, published online 24 April 2020

The original version of the published Article did not acknowledge
the passing of the sixth Author, Norah Borus. To improve clarity,
the Author contributions have been updated to include the
following: Norah Borus was not able to review the manuscript
prior to submission but she was integral to the concept and
design phase of the project and contributed significantly to
the codebase. Norah Borus passed away on 14th June 2019.
Additionally, the second sentence in the second paragraph and
the sixth sentence of the penultimate paragraph of the Discussion
have been edited for clarity. The HTML and PDF versions of the
Article have been corrected.

Published online: 28 July 2020

Scripps Research Translational Institute

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons

BY Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.

© The Author(s) 2020

np} nature partner

journals
