Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107208

 

“* RELIABILITY
ENGINEERING

& SYSTEM
SAFETY

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

    

Reliability Engineering and System Safety

ie.

ELSEVIER

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ress

 

 

Operational limits for aquaculture operations from a risk and safety

Check for

perspective ae

 

Xue Yang”", Ramin Ramezani‘, Ingrid Bouwer Utne’, Ali Mosleh”, Pal Furset Lader*

* Department of Marine Technology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), NO 7491, Trondheim, Norway
> The B. John Garrick Institute for the Risk Sciences, Department of Materials Science & Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, United States
© Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, United States

 

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

 

 

Keywords:

Machine learning
Operational decisions
Risk analysis
Operational limits
Aquaculture operation

Current decision making regarding whether to abort a high-risk aquaculture operation in a Norwegian fish farm
is mainly experience-driven. The on-site personnel decides whether to start/delay/abort operations primarily
based on their subjective judgement about whether they can handle the situation. The risk is considered im-
plicitly as “gut feelings”. There are no explicit operational limits nor a structured process to derive these for high-
risk operations. In this research, a predefine safety-critical attributes have been identified from major accident
scenarios to guide machine learning process to define operational limits based on multi-source data. Bayesian
network, Tree Augmented Naive Bayes (TAN) search algorithms were selected to build up prediction model so
that operational limits upon a given condition can be decided. The paper concludes that machine learning
techniques have great potential to be used to support safe decision-making in high-risk aquaculture operation,
and the risk-based operational limits facilitates better understanding of operational context, and comprehension
of the meaning of several deviations which may indicate a dangerous situation.

 

1. Introduction 1.2. Safety in aquaculture

1.1. Norwegian aquaculture

Aquaculture in Norway has been identified as the sector with sig-
nificant potential for further growth. The Norwegian fish farming industry
is expected to grow fivefold by 2050 [1] compared to 2010. The most
recent figures from Statistics Norway show that in 2018, the sector pro-
duced 1.35 million tons of fish for human consumption, with a first-hand
value of almost €6.5 billion, of which, Atlantic salmon made up 95% of the
total [2]. Despite the positive prediction, the industry is facing challenges
of a lack of sheltered coastal sites and increasing negative ecological
consequences due to sea lice, fish escapes and farm waste left on the
seabed [3]. The industry is also experiencing technological innovations in
more exposed locations. The severe wave and current conditions, irregular
wind and sheer remoteness, and uncertainties in new technologies amplify
the risk to both personnel and the fish [4, 5]. It is especially challenging to
get skilled staff at exposed locations [6].

Safe production of Atlantic salmon is the key to ensure a healthy and
sustainable expansion of the industry. The safety by definition is the
“Freedom from those conditions that can cause death, injury, occupa-
tional illness, damage to or loss of equipment or property, or damage to
the environment” [7]. Achieving safety is predicated on reducing the
risk “to a level that is as low as reasonably practicable, where the re-
maining risk is generally accepted” [8]. Safety has a broader inter-
pretation in aquaculture industry due to dealing with living animals in
an open marine environment to provide food to the end customers. Five
dimensions of risk need to be considered and minimized to an accep-
table level, which are the risk to personnel (i.e., personal injury and
fatality), the environment (e.g., fish escape, pollution), the fish welfare
(e.g., fish injury, mortality), the marine assets (e.g., fish farms, service
vessels) and food safety (e.g., food poisoning of end customers) [9].

Abbreviation: AI, Artificial Intelligence; API, Application programming interface; BN, Bayesian network; FN, False negatives; FP, False positives; ICT, Information
and communications technology; IMR, Inspection, Maintenance, and Repair; LOA, Length of the vessel; ML, Machine learning; NYTEK, Technical requirements for
fish farming installations; ROC, Receiver operating characteristic curve; SVM, Support vector machine; TAN, Tree Augmented Naive Bayes (TAN); TN, True nega-
tives; TP, True positives; WEKA, Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: xue.yang@ntnu.no (X. Yang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2020.107208

Received 31 May 2019; Received in revised form 24 May 2020; Accepted 20 August 2020

Available online 23 August 2020

0951-8320/ © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
X. Yang, et al.

1.3. High-risk aquaculture operations

Aquaculture operations (e.g., fish transportation, delivery of feed,
feeding, net cleaning, delousing, and IMR (Inspection, Maintenance,
and Repair), etc.) are critical to achieving safety objectives. Norwegian
sea-based aquaculture is the second most dangerous profession after
capture fisheries in terms of personal safety [10]. The industry is al-
ready operating at the edge of safety limits [24]. Operators working in
aquaculture operations are exposed to harsh weather conditions such as
high winds, stiff currents, and large waves that cause confined spaces
unstable and moving. Crane operations can be complicated when the
vessel is moving relative to net cages. The statistics of fish escape during
2010-2016 show that among sea-based aquaculture operations, most
fish escapes happened during delousing operation, handling of the
sinker tube, handling of the dead fish pump during net cleaning, and
loading and unloading of fish [11]. The delousing operation is also
critical to fish health and welfare. The Norwegian food safety authority
has received over 400 incident reports during and after the delousing
operation in one year indicating a severely compromised fish welfare
[12].

1.4. Challenges in decision-making related to safe operations

The large and demanding aquaculture operations are mostly done
by specialized service companies. The rapid development of the in-
dustry follows fast employment growth [13]. Concerns about in-
experienced employee arise from both the industry and the authorities,
especially in service companies. Today, one service company may
provide service to over 100 fish farms in different locations along the
coast of Norway. Some fish farms have more complicated topography
than the others. The technical, operational and geographical differences
among fish farms raise challenges for service companies. Operators
must be able to make critical decisions to avoid personal injuries,
system failures, fish escape and negative impact on the fish health and
welfare before/during the operation in a relatively short time. The on-
site personnel decides whether to start/delay/abort operations mainly
based on weather conditions and their experience. What is perceived as
bad weather is rather subjective depends on whether the personnel feels
they can handle the operation in such weather. The risk is considered
implicitly as “gut feelings”, which is described as “risk-as-feelings”
[14]. There is no explicit operational limits and cut off criteria or for
high-risk operations. This could be dangerous in some situations. Re-
search has shown that in some adverse weather conditions, operators
prioritize fish safety (e.g., reducing the risk of fish escape) over per-
sonnel safety [15]. The need for such operational limits, as well as a
systematic and structured process for determining the limits, increases
strongly.

1.5. Opportunities for a safer decision-making process

1.5.1. Multi-source data

The Norwegian aquaculture industry has taken the direction of
using ICT-based solutions, such as monitoring and control tools in
production. There are more operational data registered in the fish farms
and services companies to keep records of the production and services
provided. Along with the increase in using technology, the volume of
open data is steadily increasing in the sector as well. Norwegian
Meteorological Institute provides Application programming interface
(APD) to access historical weather and climate data. As such, obtaining
weather data for different locations in the Norwegian coastal and
marine areas has largely become feasible. Norwegian Food Safety
Authority publishes sea lice reports from all fish farms weekly, and
Norwegian Veterinary Institute publishes fish health data to reveal
which fish farms have affected or are suspected of having pancreas
disease and infectious salmon anemia.

All the above data from various sources contain valuable risk

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107208

information that provides input to make safe operational decisions. A
critical question, however, is to investigate how to identify the most
critical information from multiple sources and how to integrate this
information into risk models to derive operational limits. The risk-based
operational limits should help the operator to interpret the presented
information and comprehend the meaning of several deviations to
highlight any indication of a dangerous situation.

1.5.2. Artificial intelligence and machine learning

One of the main paradigms of Artificial Intelligence (AI) is problem-
solving in which an intelligent task to automate is interpreted as a series
of problems to be solved [16]. In our safe decision-making scenario, the
intelligent task(s) are problems that arise in determining major risk
contributors and predicting whether an operation is risky and should be
aborted.

Machine learning (ML) is a powerful technique for solving AI pro-
blems and has gained more traction over the past few years with the
popularity of modern neural network and deep learning. Machine
learning can be briefly explained as a reasoning strategy (inductive)
that a program or AI agent harnesses to learn from past experiences or
background knowledge to discover new, relevant information. It is
normally employed a) in categorization in which it learns why ex-
amples are put together in a certain way, to later predict the category of
an unseen example, and b) to learn a way of predicting the value of an
unseen data attribute, given series of examples and some background
information about those examples. In summary, ML is used to extract
implicit patterns of data that cannot be easily found using experts and is
concerned with ways to construct computer programs to improve au-
tomatically through experience. The main distinction between ML and
statistical data modeling lies in their goals and strategies. Statistics is
primarily concerned with model validity and accurate estimation of
model parameters from which inferences are made. However, predic-
tion of unseen examples that is the main goal of ML is less of a concern.

A wide range of fields try to harness ML techniques instead of re-
lying solely on statistical models with strong or weak assumptions.
However, within the aquaculture sector, modern data science meth-
odologies, especially machine learning, have not been explored. The
digitalization, open source data and operational data in today's aqua-
culture open the opportunity to employ ML techniques to build models
to “unlock” the subjective experience of operators. By harnessing ML
techniques, we would embrace the uncertainties brought by new
technologies and more complex and unfamiliar operating environment.

1.6. Objective

The main objective of the paper is to explore an approach to define
operational limits for aquaculture operations from a risk and safety
perspective using modern data science. The defined operational limits
aims to provide the aquaculture industry, especially the service com-
panies, support to make safe operational planning decisions for both
coastal and offshore fish farms.

2. Material and methodology
2.1. Methodology

As illustrated in Fig.1, the research starts with a literature review to
identify accident scenarios and major risk factors that could impact the
abort operation decision in typical aquaculture operations. An opera-
tional log from a service company is analysed and events are aggregated
to extract relevant information. A selection of thirteen predictor attri-
butes based on major risk contributors are identified and relevant data
are collected from different sources. The data are integrated into one
datasheet, cleaned, pre-processed, and transformed to categorical data
to enable an effective machine learning process.

A statistical correlation analysis is carried out to identify attributes
X. Yang, et al.

that significantly correlate with the decision. Attributes are evaluated
by the use of machine learning techniques to find the most important
predictors to avoid overfitting and improve prediction model perfor-
mance. Subsets of attributes that are significant with respect to de-
termining the decision are used to define operational limits, results of
which are presented and discussed in the paper.

The operational decisions analysed in this study was obtained from
a service company which provides aquaculture operation service to fish
farmers, such as delousing, net cleaning, and mooring and so on. Such
an operational log is used to record working hours for the clients (163
fish farms). The recorded information includes the date of the opera-
tion, time to start operation, time to finish the operation, name of the
fish farm, type of operation, vessels used for operation, whether the
operation is aborted, and general comments. In some circumstances, the
causes for aborted operation are commented, for example, “the wind is
too strong”, “the visibility is poor”. Four meetings have been carried out
with the service company and sea-based fish farms. The topics covered
issues related to operation procedures, past accidents, possible accident
scenarios, and risk factors to obtain domain knowledge.

Whether the operation is aborted is interpreted as our classification
problem which have two classes: “Abort operation = YES” and “Abort
operation = NO”. WEKA (Waikato Environment for Knowledge
Analysis) open-source machine learning suite/workbench [17] devel-
oped by the University of Waikato is used as a toolkit. Weka enables
users to harness a large number of machine learning algorithms. The
algorithms are used to select attributes and evaluate and develop a
prediction model based on the most relevant factors. Genie (Graphical
Network Interface) software developed by the University of Pittsburgh
[18] is also used to reproduce and present the prediction model to infer
under different conditions. More details about the process are given in
the following subsections.

2.2. Accident scenarios and major risk factors

In Norwegian sea-based aquaculture, the most common modes of
fatalities related to aquaculture operations are loss of vessel, man
overboard, and blow from an object [19]. From 2004 to 2015, the
majority (67%) of the accidents happened onboard work vessels, in-
cluding wellboats (i.e., a fishing vessel with a tank for the storage and
transportation of live fish), and 21% happened in the fish farm. Severe
injuries are mostly due to blowing from objects, falls, and entangle-
ment. [20] point out in current practices in the industry that the ha-
zards are generally identified; however, there is a lack of knowledge
about risk factors during aquaculture operations.

Fish escape is regarded as the most severe risk to the environment
and is a challenge for the Norwegian aquaculture industry. Farmed fish
is regarded as a threat to the wild fish population due to transferring of
disease, interbreed, and competing with wild stock [21]. The fish es-
cape has been designated as one of three main categories of Norwegian
fishery crime since 2011 [22]. The operators face fines if found re-
sponsible for large-scale escapes (i.e., escape of more than 10 000 fish
(21]), in addition to reputation damage. The major causes of the fish
escape are structural damage and holes in the net [23]. Collisions be-
tween non-operation related vessels and fish farms can also cause se-
vere damages, not only to the cages (in the worst case it may result in
loss of the fish farm) but may also lead to large-scale fish escape [24,
25).

In the research presented in this paper, the following five accident
scenarios with corresponding risk factors are used as a basis for the
work.

e Scenario 1: fish escape due to structural damage
e Scenario 2: fish escape due to holes in the net

e Scenario 3: fatality due to loss of vessel

e Scenario 4: fatality due to blow from objects

e Scenario 5: loss of fish farm due to ship collision

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107208

The following subsections describe important risk factors involved
in the accident scenarios related to the weather, work vessel, the fish
farm, operation, and crew. These factors are further used to derive at-
tributes for machine learning research.

2.2.1. The weather

The weather condition is a predominant accident cause in aqua-
culture operations. The weather includes wind, waves, current, pre-
cipitation, daylight, and relative humidity. Interviews conducted by
[23] show that what is perceived as bad weather depends on the in-
dividual farm site and its location in terms of typical wind direction and
currents. Generally, as long as the personnel on the fish farm perceive
that the weather is “acceptable”, the operation would not be called off.

2.2.1.1. Wind and waves. The upper parts of the vessel and the fish
farm are mainly influenced by wind, while wind-generated wave and
current loads mainly influence the lower parts. The wind load could
account for 5-10% of the total forces on the mooring system of a farm
[26]. Strong wind and high waves increase the capsizing risk of service
vessels (scenario 3). It becomes difficult for the service vessels to berth
to the floating collar and increase the chance for mooring lines of the
net cage and the net come in contact with the vessels' hull and
propellers. This increases the possibility to make holes on the net so
that fish can escape (scenario 2). It is also observed that in rough
weather, a strong wind gust can make it difficult for large service
vessels to moor to the cages and that the operation has to be aborted
eventually. Crane operations are particularly vulnerable to wind and
waves. The strong wind increases the risk of the blow from objects in
lifting operations (scenario 4). Moreover, the rough weather conditions
make operations between vessels and fish cage challenging to perform,
and, in turn, increase the risk related to operator slips/trips/falls while
moving on the vessel deck or net cage. The strong wind and high waves
also increase the likelihood of fish escape, especially for certain
operations, such as handling the net and the sinker tube [23]
(scenario 2).

The wave conditions depend on wind condition, topography,
proximity to open sea, and bathymetry. There are two types of waves:
wind-generated and swell-generated waves. In sheltered areas where
the most fish farms are located, the ocean swells are not significant to
operability, while the wind-generated waves are the major concern
while planning for aquaculture operations.

2.2.1.2. Current. Current loads contribute to approximately 70% - 75%
of the total forces on a typical mid-size fish cage in current conditions
0.5-1.0 m/s [26]. Besides, during aquaculture operations, when the
service vessels, especially large service vessels moor at the weather side
of the cage, the anchor load could increase significantly in high current
velocity. There is limited numerical study of large service vessels
operating at a fish farm in current, but a similar research on wellboat
shows that the anchor load to the cage could increase by up to 90% in
current velocity 1.0 - 1.5 m/s, because of the wellboat [27]. In such
situation, the risk of escape due to structural damage will increase
(scenario 1). The current is therefore considered a potential risk factor
for aquaculture operations.

2.2.1.3. Visibility. Poor visibility has been identified as a risk factor in
maritime accidents [28-31]. Heavy rain and fog can result in reduced
visibility. The reduced visibility increases the demand for vessel
maneuvering and positioning skills, which may increase the
likelihood of vessels colliding with the fish farm (scenario 5). [23]
reported darkness as a factor that led to human mistakes during
operation, and night work has contributed to previous fish escapes
and near accidents (scenario 2). With poor lighting, it is difficult to
ensure that operations are performed properly. In some operations like
net cleaning, the visibility becomes even poorer as water and biofouling
are sprayed around.
X. Yang, et al.

2.2.2. The vessel
2.2.2.1. Size of the vessel and age of the vessel. Aquaculture operations
are performed by different types of vessels. For cleaning operations,
mooring, inspections, changing of nets, and transportation of workers
between shore and the fish farm, the most used vessels are 14.9 m
catamarans, 25 m catamarans, and 40 m monohulls. 60 m vessels are
sometimes used for delousing operations and mooring operations. In
general, the small and medium vessels are more vulnerable to waves
than the large service vessels. The statistics show that the fleet of vessels
of 24 m and smaller has the largest share of shipwreck and the highest
fatality rate among the accidents from 2007 to 2016 [32]. The
majorities of accidents registered by the Norwegian Maritime
Authority in 2015 and 2016 involved small vessels under 15 m [32].
The vessel related accidents have not been analyzed statistically
with focus on the aquaculture sector. In the maritime industry, the size
of the vessel and age of the vessel have been identified as risk factors
that influence the severity of the accidents [31]. Age of the vessel has
been identified as an indicator of ship conditions [31], but old ships do
not always suffer more accidents than young ships [33, 34]. The quality
of the shipbuilding, combined with the maintenance of the ship during
operation, influence the accident rates. [34] point out that an older ship
over 20 years of age is more prone to total loss accident.

2.2.3. The fish farm

2.2.3.1. Location of the farm. The conventional fish farms are usually
placed in areas that are sheltered from waves by islands or fjords. This
implies that if the waves come from a direction such that islands are
placed directly in front of the production facility; the operational
conditions are better than if the waves come from an open sector. In
harsh weather conditions, if the vessel fails to secure the mooring line
to the cage, the vessel may drift quickly and collide with the islands or
rocks nearby (scenario 3).

2.2.3.2. Age of fish farm. Age of fish farm (i.e., calculated from the
commissioning year) could be an indirect indicator of its technical
condition. Also, in 2004, the technical standard NS 9415 “Marine fish
farms - Requirements for design, dimensioning, production, installation
and operation” was introduced as a response to a high number of fish
escapes because of structural failures [35]. The NYTEK regulations (i.e.,
Technical requirements for fish farming installations) require that a fish
farm shall comply with the standard which put the requirement to the
physical design of all the main components in an _ installation,
functionality after assembly, and how the installation shall be
operated to prevent fish escape. The companies producing main
components (i.e., net pens, floating collars, mooring lines, barges,
etc.) need to have a producer's certification, and the products need to
have a certificate, to ensure the equipment can sustain the operating
environment. The effect of NYTEK and NS 9415 to reduce structural
failures is significant, especially after the last revision of NS 9415 in
2009. Under the assumption that producer's certification could improve
the quality of the fish farm components, whether the fish farms were
built before 2009 or after 2009 is also considered under age of fish farm
(see Table 1).

2.2.4. The operation

2.2.4.1. Type of operation. Most fish escapes happened during
delousing operation, handling of the sinker tube, handling of the
dead fish pump, net cleaning, and loading and unloading of fish [11].
These operations increase the likelihood of tearing holes in the net
(scenario 2). The operations that involve the use of cranes expose the
operators to higher risk and blow by objects (scenario 4) and have
become the single most significant cause of fatalities in the last twenty
years [19, 36]. These lifting operations have also been identified as
contributing factor to fish escape [23].

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107208

2.2.5. The crew

Operational errors during delousing or maintenance have been
identified as one of the causes to fish escapes [21]. Fish escape has
happened, for example, due to the net being left open after sorting fish
or changing of nets and tearing of the net when crowding the fish
(scenario 2). A study carried out by [23] shows that the underlying
causes to human errors are: interaction with technology, physical
working environment, workload, work pressure, skills, training, ex-
perience, communication and safety management in general.

Human factors are also identified as a contributing factor to mar-
itime accidents, along with the condition of the ship and other external
factors, such as bad weather [37]. [31] summarize human conditions
that contribute to accidents from different sources which include un-
professional behavior, decision failures, inappropriate planning, misuse
of equipment, failures related to supervision, inadequate attention,
communication and cooperation, distraction, confusion, fatigue, health,
and education.

2.3. Data collection and data transformation

In our classification problem between the classes “Abort
operation = YES”, and “Abort operation = NO”, we face the following
challenges. First, the data obtained for the year 2018 from January to
April is a continuous operational log that records both “Abort
operation = YES” and “Abort operation = NO” classes. However, the
data for the year 2016 and 2017 only contain “Abort operation = YES”
class. This is because of the limitation of accessing to the database that
we could not get the complete dataset. Second, if we classify the classes
only based on continuous operational data for 2018, there is a low
number of samples of “Abort operation” = YES (12%). Classification
based on imbalanced datasets is rather challenging since one class
(often the interesting one) does not have enough samples. As such, it
would be difficult for learning algorithms to generalize and form a
hypothesis around the minority class. There are a number of ways to
tackle imbalanced datasets: under sampling the majority or over-
sampling the minority data samples. Oversampling technique is com-
monly performed by synthesizing data instances, the result of which
should be considered with a grain of salt. However, in under sampling,
no artificial data is produced [38]. Samples of “Abort operation = YES”
from the operational log years 2016 and 2017 are merged with data
from 2018 so that we have 724 samples with 390 class YES and 344
class NO.

2.3.1. Data collection and limitation

Thirteen attributes, described above, reflecting the risk factors and
influencing the predicted outcome “Decision to abort operation” are
used in this study. These attributes include average wind speed, maximum
wind speed of gust, significant wave height, type of operation, visibility, wind
comes from open sector, precipitation, daylights, maximum relative hu-
midity, vessel size, vessel age, age of fish farm, and island/Rock on collision
path. Current and crew factors have been identified as risk factors, but
they are not included in the current analysis due to limited access to
these data.

In today's practice, recording of wind measurement is not common
on most of the sea-based fish farms. Hence, in this research, these data
are retrieved from the closest official observation sites from Norwegian
Meteorological Institution [39]. One limitation is that the observation
sites may be located tens of kilometers away from the fish farm. The
other limitation is that the availability of hourly-based wind data is
rather low for most of the locations.

The wave measurement equipment is rarely installed due to ex-
pensive cost, which means that practical wave related data are chal-
lenging to obtain. The significant wave height, which indicates the
wave condition is estimated by using the fetch method as described by
[40]. The method uses wind data (i.e., average wind speed (6 h) and
wind direction) in connection with the fetch length to estimate
X. Yang, et al.

Table 1

The attributes and categories for the analysis.

No. Attributes

1 Decision to abort
operation

2 Average wind speed

3 Maximum wind speed of
gust

4 Significant wave height

5 Type of operation

6 Visibility

7 Wind comes from open
sector
8 Precipitation

9 Daylights

10 Maximum relative
humidity

11

Categories
Yes No

BO: [0.0, 0.2] Calm

B1: [0.3, 1.5] Light air

B2: [1.6-3.3] Light breeze

B3: [3.4, 5.4] Gentle breeze

B4: [5.5, 7.9] Moderate breeze
B5: [8.0, 10.7] Fresh breeze

B6: [10.8, 13.8] Strong breeze
B7: [13.9, 17.1] High wind, moderate
gale

B8: [17.2, 20.7] Gale, fresh gale
B9: [20.8, 24.4] Strong/Several gale
B10: [24.5, 28.4] Storm

B11: [28.5, 32.6] Violent storm
B12: [32.6, —] Hurricane

BO: [0.0, 0.2] Calm

B1: [0.3, 1.5] Light air

B2: [1.6-3.3] Light breeze

B3: [3.4, 5.4] Gentle breeze

B4: [5.5, 7.9] Moderate breeze
B5: [8.0, 10.7] Fresh breeze

B6: [10.8, 13.8] Strong breeze
B7: [13.9, 17.1] High wind, moderate
gale

B8: [17.2, 20.7] Gale, fresh gale
B9: [20.8, 24.4] Strong/Several gale
B10: [24.5, 28.4] Storm

B11: [28.5, 32.6] Violent storm
B12: [32.6, —] Hurricane

S1: [0-0.1) Calm (rippled)

S2: [0.1-0.5) Smooth (wavelets)
S3: [0.5-1.25) Slight

S4: [1.25-2.5) Moderate

S5: [2.5-4.0) Rough

S6: [4.0-6.0) Very rough

S7: [6.0-9.0) High

S8: [9.0-14.0) Very high

S9: [14.0, —) Phenomenal
Delousing

General

Mooring

Net cleaning

Net inspection

Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV)
inspection

Inspection of ring

Good

Bad

Yes

No

Mainly dry: [0, 0.4)

Light rain: [0.5, 2)

Rain/Snow: [2, 20)

Heavy: [20, > )

Good: the task can be carried out
thoroughly under daylight
Medium: half of the task can be carried
out in daylight

Bad: the task will be carried out
thoroughly in the darkness

RO: [0, 10)

R1: [10, 20)

R2: [20, 30)

R3: [80, 40)

R4: [40, 50)

R5: [50, 60)

R6: [60, 70)

R7: [70, 80)

R8: [80, 90)

R9: [90, 100)

R10: [100)

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107208

Description
Predicted attribute

Mean wind speed at 10 m above sea level on the date of the operation. NS 9415 recommends using
data from the nearest or the two nearest weather stations when establishing the long-term statistics
of wind speed.

Definition of categories is based on Beaufort wind force scale, which is widely used worldwide and
also adopted by Norwegian Meteorological Institution.

Strongest wind gust on the operation day. Gust is “a flurry of wind” that is more powerful and can be
significantly higher than the value of average wind speed. They are therefore, dangerous for
operations such as lifting [44].

Definition of categories is based on the Beaufort wind force scale.

In aquaculture today, the wave conditions are mostly based on subjective observation, instead of
measurement based. The subjective observations are not recorded in the operational logs. Two
parameters represent wave conditions: significant wave height and wave period. Significant wave
height is a statistical description of the wave phenomena, which is defined as the average wave
height for the highest third of the waves in one registration [35]. According to a study conducted by
SINTEF Ocean [45], the operational limits for service vessels are mainly set based on significant
wave height.

Definition of categories is based on the World Meteorological organization's codes for sea state.

The operations that are recorded in the operational logs.

Visibility of the environment during marine operation. The categories are retrieved from descriptive
information registered in the comment column of the operational logs.

Wind direction is considered in connection with the fetch method, whether it comes from the open
sector or not (Fig. 2).

The accumulated amount of precipitation in 24 h. The heavy precipitation may lead to bad visibility
and creates difficulties for the operation.

Definition of categories is adopted from the Norwegian Meteorological Institute [46].

Sunrise and sunset information of each location is retrieved from website [47].

Maximum relative humidity in 24 h. The humidity may correspond to the possibility of fog forming,
which would lead to bad visibility.

(continued on next page)
X. Yang, et al.

Table 1 (continued)

No. Attributes Categories
Vessel size Small: 15 m
(Length of the vessel) Medium: 25 m

Large: > 40 m

12 Vessel age Very old: [25, )

Old: [20, 25)

Medium-old: [15, 20)
New-Medium: [10, 15)
Relative new: [5, 10)
New: [0, 5)

Description

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107208

The vessel size is defined based on the length of the vessel (LOA), which are usually used in
aquaculture operations.

Age of the vessel at the time of the operation. The study of accidents about the age of the ships shows
that most of the vessels are over 25 years old [33], which are defined as “Very old”.

In 2015, the Norwegian Maritime Authority enforced a new regulation for cargo vessels of 8-24 m
length, which introduced new technical requirements for the aquaculture fleet below 24 m to
improve the safety level of the service vessels. This forms the basis to define to vessels less than 5

years old as “New”.

13 Age of fish farm Old: [<1979)

Old-Medium: [1979, 1989)
Medium: [1989, 1999)
Medium-New: [1999, 2009)
New: [2009, —]

14 Island/Rock on collision Good: The average fetch length >

path 500 m

Bad: The average fetch length < = 500
m

significant wave height upon fish farms that are registered in the op-
erational log on the day of the operation. The basic principle is that the
longer the fetch length and the higher the wind speed, the more en-
ergetic the sea state will be, which means that the fish farm is exposed
to a tougher operating environment. Fetch plot can be generated with
indicated wind direction, which illustrates whether the wind comes
from the open sector’ or not (Fig. 2). The fetch analysis must be used
with the understanding that there is uncertainties in the estimates of the
wave parameters. The method assumes deep water and constant wind
over a period of 6 h. Also, it does not include swell waves.

The operation and vessel related information is retrieved from the
service company, and the fish farm related information (e.g., location,
commission year) is obtained from the Norwegian Directorate of
Fisheries [41] for further processing.

2.3.2. Data transformation

Data transformation is the process of aggregating, summarizing, and
in general preparing the data into forms that can be used by machine
learning algorithms [42]. In this project, original operational data
consists of several events and actions logged during an operational day,
and these events are all aggregated into one row. The final daily op-
erational decision is presented in the log and highlights whether the
operation was eventually aborted or not. Often, during a day, the op-
eration starts and later aborts due to change of weather condition, and
it would be possible to keep all interim decisions and their corre-
sponding weather conditions as one data point. However, since we did
not have access to hourly weather data that caused the possible changes
of the decision during each day, we focus on the general weather
condition of an operational day and final decision in this study.
Therefore, we decided to only keep the final decision of each day along
with corresponding weather conditions.

The original dataset consists of a mixed numeric (e.g., average wind
speed) and categorical data (e.g., type of operation, outcome decision).
The numeric data is discretised as this has been shown to be an effective
measure to have improved performance of several Bayes net and lo-
gistic regression techniques [43]. The defined categories and descrip-
tions of the attributes are listed in Table 1.

' When the fetch reaches 40 km, the search for island is terminated, and the
sector is assumed to be open [40] Lader P, Kristiansen D, Alver M, Bjelland HV,
Myrhaug D. Classification of Aquaculture Locations in Norway With Respect to
Wind Wave Exposure. ASME 2017 36th International Conference on Ocean,
Offshore and Arctic Engineering: American Society of Mechanical Engineers;
2017. p. VOO6TO5A5-VTO5A5.

The age of the fish farm. To incorporate the effect of NS 9415, the fish farms that are established
after 2009 is classified as “New”. The others are grouped in a ten-year range.

The average fetch length from the Fetch analysis also indicates the vicinity of the site to islands or
land and can be used to indicate whether there are islands in an average radius of 500 m. The
resolution of the fetch search is 1 deg x 50 m, so islands smaller than 50 might not be detected.

2.4. Classification

2.4.1. Classification methods

In an initial analysis, the performance of classification model with
all 13 attributes using different classifiers are assessed. The classifiers
include decision trees, Bayesian networks, and Support Vector
Machines. The best success rate reaches 87.4% with ROC area 0.942,
which means 87.4% of the cases can be appropriately classified based
on the pre-identified attributes. This can be considered as a significant
result in the domain of aquaculture operation, in which we don't have
all the possible information at our disposal.

Random Forest (unlimited depth), Bayesian network using Tan
search algorithm, and support vector machine (SVM) showed good
predictive power with rather similar performances. Among the classi-
fiers, the graphical Bayesian network (BN) model which captures the
compositional structure of the relations offers an interesting perspective
on interpreting the outcome decision. BN is a graphical representation
of a joint probability distribution of a set of attributes. The node in the
directed acyclic graph represents a variable, and a directed arc provides
independence/dependence relationships between the nodes. A BN is
both descriptive and predictive. One attractive feature of BN is the in-
ference capability of the class given the observed values of the attri-
butes. We may also infer the probability distribution for some attributes
given the values or distributions for the remaining attributes. Therefore,
the BN was chosen for further detailed analysis.

In the research, K2 with the number of parents restricted to a pre-
defined maximum, Hill-climber, and Tree Augmented Naive Bayes
(TAN) are used as network training algorithms. K2 algorithm has a
fixed ordering of attributes and processes each node in turn, and
greedily considers adding edges from previously processed nodes to the
current processing one to maximize the network's performance [48].
Hill-climber algorithm follows a hybrid search-and-score principle that
first reconstructs a skeleton of a BN and then adding and deleting arcs
with no fixed ordering of attributes to improve the network perfor-
mance [49]. The algorithm for learning TAN classifiers first learns a
tree structure over node set, then use mutual information tests condi-
tioned on classification node. A link is added from the classification
node to each attribute node [50]. The class then has no parents, and
each attribute has the class attribute as the parent.

2.4.2. Accuracy of classifiers
The following classifier accuracy measures are used to evaluate the

prediction models.

e Classification success rate: the percentage of test set tuples that are
X. Yang, et al.

Table 2
A confusion matrix for positive and negative tuples.

Predicted class

a (Abort
operation = NO)

b (Abort
operation = YES)

Actual class a (Abort True positive (TP) False positive (FP)
operation = NO)
b (Abort False negative(FN) True negative (TN)
operation = YES)

correctly classified.

e Confusion matrix (contingency table): a measure that shows how
well the classifier can recognize tuples of different classes. In our
case, Abort operation has two classes: YES or NO. True positives (TP)
shows the number of cases that the classifier predicted NO, and they
indeed are NO in the test dataset. True negatives (TN) shows the
other class that they are predicted YES and actually are YES too.
False positives (FP) are the cases that are predicted YES, but their
actual class is NO. False negatives (FN) is the number of tuples that
are predicted NO, but they actually are YES. High True negative rate
is practically more important than high True positive rate, because
the more Abort operation = YES are correctly classified, the better to
ensure safe operations. The low True positive rate, which means high
False positives rate that the operation was classified not need to be
aborted, but aborted, is not safety critical. So, if two models have the
same classification success rates, higher TN is preferred than the
lower one. The results of the confusion matrix in Section 3 are
presented based on contingency table (Table 2).

e ROC area (the area under Receiver operating characteristic curve):
ROC curve is a plot that shows the True positive rate against the
False positive rate at various threshold settings. The area under the
ROC curve is a metric commonly used to evaluate the overall per-
formance of the classification model. A perfect classifier will have an
area of 1.0. Therefore, we can evaluate the models by comparing the
areas under the different ROC curves.

2.5. Relevance analysis

Relevance analysis, which includes correlation analysis and
wrapper feature selection, are used to highlight attributes that are more
relevant to the outcome (abort operation or not-abort operation deci-
sion) [42]. The results of the relevance analysis give a list of selections
of attributes for further evaluation via different classifiers to find the
best prediction model.

The correlation analysis is carried out between attributes and out-
come, based on only 2018 dataset that has a representative of 391
aggregated events. Person's Chi-square test is commonly used to carry
out the correlation analysis for categorical attributes. However, in the
dataset, more than one cell of the contingency table has less than five
observations, which means the data is considered skewed and Chi-
square is not suitable anymore. Fisher's exact test, which is specifically
designed for small samples (less than 1000), is used instead, as re-
commended by [51].

The following data processing are carried out for Fisher's exact test
to avoid bias caused by missing values, as recommended by [52]:

a) Dataset without missing values.

b) All the events that have missing values are excluded so that a
complete dataset can be available for the statistical analysis. 172
events are left for the analysis.

c) Dataset with missing values imputed.

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107208

d) All missing values are marked as level “NaN”. All 391 events are
included in the analysis.

e) Replace all missing values with means from the data for the statis-
tical analysis. All 391 events are included in the analysis.

[53] pointed out that attributes that are significantly correlated
with an outcome do not necessarily improve the prediction. This means
significant attributes are not always good predictors, and the attributes
with strong predictivity sometimes fail to be significant. In this study,
the wrapper method using predictive machine learning algorithms is
applied to evaluate attributes sets. One merit of wrapper method is that
it supports detection of interaction between attributes. Another merit is
that it searches for optimal attribute subset for the desired machine
learning algorithm, which is Bayesian network in our study.

3. Results

The dataset (724 instances), which contains 390 class “Abort
operation = YES” and 344 class “Abort operation = NO”, is divided
into two parts, with 2/3 allocated to a training set and the remaining 1/
3 allocated to a test set. The training dataset is used to build the pre-
diction model, while the test dataset is to estimate the accuracy of the
classification model. Predictive capacity is assessed based on success
rate, confusion matrix, and ROC area.

The BN generated using the selected features by the algorithms re-
ported success rate 85.4% with ROC area 0.939. The Bayesian network
TAN learning algorithm treats the classification node (i.e., abort op-
eration) as the first node in the ordering to learn the structure, which
means the classification node is treated as the parent of all other nodes.
The Bayesian network is reproduced using GeNIe and the inferred
conditional probabilities from data are entered into the nodes (Fig. 3).
The conditional probabilities from each state are estimated from the
data using the maximum likelihood method.

It is observed from the dataset that four attributes have the ability to
override others when they reach a certain state. When Average wind
speed reaches B7 [13.9, 17.1], or maximum wind speed of gust reaches
B10 [24.5, 28.4], or visibility is Bad, or precipitation is heavy, the op-
erations are aborted. This is also in line with the BN that has been re-
produced. When above-mentioned four attributes are set up to limit
states, the probability of abort operation is updated to be 97%, 90%,
84% and 82%. If we use the metaphor based on the traffic light, a single
red light can call off the operation, the operational limits can be any of
these overriding attributes reaching the above-mentioned limits. The
challenge lies in situations when some of the overriding attributes are in
a marginal situation which can be designated as orange. If two or three
attributes have orange lights, what would be the best suggestion to the
operators? The Bayesian network opens possibility to derive opera-
tional limits in such situations by updating belief based on entered
evidences. In most circumstances, certain factors are known while
planning for operations, such as type of operation, farm age, vessel size,
and vessel age. The operational limits can then be represented by states
of a combination of other attributes. For example, if we plan to do net
cleaning operation tomorrow, using new small service vessels, farm age
is new, what would be the operational limits in terms of weather con-
ditions? From the updated BN based on evidences (Fig. 4), we can
roughly interpret that, if the forecast for tomorrow indicates that the
maximum wind speed of gust would be approximately or higher than
B7 (i.e., [13.9, 17.1] m/s), average wind speed approximately or higher
than B3 (i.e., [3.4, 5.4]), rain, there is a higher likelihood that the
operation will be aborted. In such a manner, the BN provides the pos-
sibility to derive operational limits upon the operational contexts, such
as condition of the vessel and the farm, and type of operation, to fa-
cilitate operational planning decision-making.
X. Yang, et al.

4. Discussion

The proposed approach is a risk-assessment guided development
process using machine learning techniques to derive operational limits
to support planning decisions related to high-risk aquaculture opera-
tions. The risk to personal safety, fish escape are considered in the
process. The objective of the study is not to propose accurate opera-
tional limits, but an approach to define such limits. From the devel-
opment process of the limits, the following topics for discussion arise,
which are:

e Novelty of the approach

e Usefulness of risk-based operational limits

e Advantage and disadvantage of the approach
e Limitations

4.1. Novelty of the approach

Machine learning has been applied to safety and risk research in
recent years mainly to explore the factors that contribute to accidents
[26-29]. Within the aquaculture sector alone, the advantage of machine
learning has not been explored and harnessed. In this study, we used a
risk assessment guided approach and the possibilities that arise in open
source data and operational data in aquaculture to explore subjective
and experience-based decision-making process. The results show that
based on carefully selected attributes and multi-source data, there is a
potential to crack the code of “gut feelings” of the operators to explicitly
express operational limits from a safety and risk perspective.

The process starts from identification of accident scenarios from
accidents reports. Major risk factors that may contribute to the identi-
fied scenarios are further identified from relevant literature in aqua-
culture field and other industries that have similar operating environ-
ment. The attributes that can represent the risk factor are established
based on domain knowledge and further feed into machine learning
process. The results show that the initial selection of attributes guided
by the accident scenarios and identified risk factors have a rather good
predicative performance of the decision. The approach eliminates the
number of attributes so that the computation cost can be reduced sig-
nificantly.

The BN, Tan search algorithms was selected to build up the model
based on most important attributes following wrapper feature selection
method. The operational limits derived from BN enables inference
under conditions of uncertainty so that operational limits can reflect
known evidences and unknow status of the other attributes.

4.2. Usefulness of risk-based operational limits model

The research shows that the operational limits model has potential
to improve situational awareness of operational contexts, which is
critical for service companies who have to operate in more than 100
locations that have different technical, operational and geographical
conditions. The model will facilitate understanding of how interactions
between risk factors can influence the decision. The interactions are
relatively hard to capture especially in an unfamiliar location with
complicated typology. The risk-based operational limits should help the
operator to interpret the presented information and comprehend the
meaning of several deviations to highlight any indication of a dan-
gerous situation. The model can be one of the responses to industrial
challenge of not able to get sufficient skilled staff [7].

The model of operational limits derived from the proposed approach
can also contribute to guiding data collection by specifying data need to
be more accurately recorded. Acquisition of data is the most time-
consuming and difficult task in this study due to challenges discussed in

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107208

Section 2.3.1. The research reveals the importance of collecting and
sharing critical data to ensure safe operations. For instance, the data
quality can be improved in the future by recording weather forecast
data while planning the operation, and wind measurement data prior to
decisions.

4.3. Advantage and disadvantage of the approach

In a data science project, it is essential to gather data, aggregate and
integrate it, clean the data and pre-process it, and ultimately select the
features and design a predictive system. Thus many trials and errors
should be performed while going through all the mentioned stages [54].
It is estimated that data cleaning and exploration constitutes as much as
80% of a data mining effort [55]. The risk assessment guided initial
selection of attributes shows good results, and a good preparation of the
attributes at the beginning of the analysis process can save time, avoid
unnecessary trials and errors.

One finding of the study is that the feature selection process dis-
carded several attributes without significantly influencing the pre-
dictive accuracy. This includes wind comes from open sector, daylights,
maximum relative humidity, and island/rock on collision path. Following
the law of parsimony, a simpler model that contains less number of
features that can have higher predictive accuracy compared to more
complex models is the drive behind feature selection. These features
may be irrelevant in presence of the others or redundant from data
processing perspective. Whether they can be regarded as non-safety
critical is subject to discussion. The analysis is based on historical op-
erational logs. What is “unlocked” are what the operators have been
considering while making abort operation decisions. The derived model
can illustrate how the decisions have been made, but not necessarily
how the decisions should be made.

The performance of the derived operational limits is highly depen-
dent on the quality of attributes interpreted from identified risk factors.
There is uncertainty related to whether the most important risk factors
have been identified, whether the attributes represent the risk factors
sufficiently, and whether data for each attribute is available. For ex-
ample, visibility can be influenced by precipitation, relative humidity,
and daylights, however, sometimes, low visibility cannot be explained
by these three attributes only. Sea fog usually occurs at a relative hu-
midity near 100% (R10); however, fog can also form at a lower hu-
midity, and sometimes even with a relative humidity of 100%, the fog
fails to form . To ensure the most representative attributes, sufficient
domain knowledge will be required. A line of research about risk and
risk indicators can be the basis for better defining the attributes. Earlier
work on safety-critical parameters, which are factors that have direct
and significant influences on the risk involved in operation [56], can be
further explored in further work.

4.4. Limitations

This approach assumes that the decisions (i.e., abort operation or
not) were risk-based, which means the operators were considering the
risk of doing operation while making the decisions. The scenarios are
the ones that expose both the personnel and the fish to high risk. The
scenarios are used to derive major risk factors to further find possible
relevant attributes. However, the factors that may influence the severity
of consequences are not covered in the study. In other words, the
quantifications of losses is not considered/covered. This is a limitation
of the approach.

In our case, the Bayesian network is selected as the most feasible
model due to its high predictive performance, powerful representation
of knowledge, and inference capability under conditions of uncertainty.
There is inherent uncertainty in machine learning techniques,
X. Yang, et al.

Accident scenarios Operational lo
identification P 6

Major risk influencing
factors identification

Aggregation of events

   

 

Attributes selection

+ Information extraction

  

Data collection

Dataset preparation

 

Data transformation

 

 

 

Processed

Correlation analysis
dataset

No Additional operational
log acquisition
Attribute subset
selection

    
 

  

Dataset is
balanced?

  

Yes

  

outcome decision

 

Subset of
attributes to
outcome decision

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107208

Significant

attributes to
No

 
    
 

  

All candidate
ibsets finished

Run through different
classifier

 

 
   
  
 

   
 
 

Yes

Classification model
selection
Operational limits model
presentation

 
 

 

 

Fig. 1. Method used in the research presented in this paper.

especially in the attribute subset selection domain, due to the statistical
nature of most of its algorithms. It is still a challenge that sometimes the
attributes look irrelevant in isolation, but may become relevant in
combination [54].

Besides the uncertainty rooted in the machine learning techniques,
there are also uncertainties with respect to handling missing values. As
typical, imputing missing values usually gives more accurate models

_91 - 26.11.2016 07:01:00 - 34477 - NAUSTTAREN - BJOROYA AS

 

40 “ar

-} *

’ 7 Wdir : 18 deg
30> / , F :1400m
20 -

  
 

—
o
T

F avg: 1438 m
‘ .£ Wspd : 7.75 m/s
Hs :0.17m
. Tp :1.58

  
 

North - South [Km]
o

=
oO
T

-20 >

-40 -30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30 40
East - West [Km]

Fig. 2. Example of fetch plot that shows the wind direction and open sector
[50].

than dropping the column entirely [42]. In this research, part of the
missing values is filled by the most probable values manually. For ex-
ample, some missing “gust”-values are replaced by the indicated wind
speed in the comments’ column if there is any. Some algorithms (e.g.,
Bayes net classifier) replace all missing values in the dataset auto-
matically the modes and means from the training data [57]. The un-
certainties of the replaced value may introduce bias into the final re-
sults.

The on-site validation of the operational limits model is not covered
in the current study yet. To be used by the service company, the model
has to be further learned by larger datasets, and digitalization of the
data collection and transformation will be necessary. Such validation
will be implemented at later stage of the project with close collabora-
tion with the service company.

5. Conclusion

The objective of the research is to explore the possibilities that arise
from multi-source data to propose an approach to define operational
limits, as an input to support safe operational decision-making. A risk
assessment guided development process using machine learning tech-
niques is proposed, and the resulted operational limits model con-
tributes to a better understanding of operational contexts. The digita-
lization in aquaculture industry and advances in data science open up
the possibility to turn implicit experiences to explicit knowledge. The
operational limits and the proposed approach to define such limits, will
be validated on field operations in the same service company. Based on
the research outcome and test results, a guideline for data collection
will be prepared to improve data quality, especially for site-specific
data. The potential of digitalizing the results to ICT system will also be
discussed in the further work.
X. Yang, et al.

    
  
 

| AbortOperation
No 47%
Yes 53%

Ld Max_wind_gust

  

|» Sig_w ave_height

 
   
 
 
 

fo Avg_wind_speed

cj Visibility

Bad 1%

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107208

Delousing 26%
34%
3%
23%
7%
Net_inspection 5%
2%

    
   
 

Mooring
ROV_inspec ...
General

  
    
 
 

  

New 10%
MediumNew 7%
Medium 5%
OldMedium 53%
Old 25%

  

Net_cleaning

     
   

Insepction_o...

= Precipitation

Mainly_dry 73%
Light_rain 8%
Rain_Snow 17%

 

Heavy_rain 2%

Vessel_age

New

43%

Relative _new 11%

New _Medium 22%

Medium_Old

Very_Old

 

13%
11%

Fig. 3. Bayesian network built by selected attributes using Tan algorithm.

Co AbortOperation
No 29%
Yes 71%

Ld Max_w ind_gust

 

 

fo Sig_wave_height

Cc Visibility

Good 98%
2%

  

New.

fo Vessel_size

Relative_new
New _Medium

= Operation_type

0%
ROV_inspec... 0%
General 0%
Net_cleaning 100%
0%
0%

    
    

100%
0%
0%
0%
0%

   

Net_inspection

Insepction_o...

 
 
   
   

Rain Snow 100%

Heavy_rain 0%

   
  

Ld Vessel_age

100%

      
   

0%
0%
0%
0%

 
    
  

Fig. 4. Updated Bayesian network by setting up evidences.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Xue Yang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Formal
analysis, Writing - original draft. Ramin Ramezani: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Writing - review & editing. Ingrid Bouwer Utne:
Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing, Funding acquisition. Ali
Mosleh: Writing - review & editing. Pal Furset Lader: Data curation.

10

Declaration of Competing Interest
None.

Acknowledgments

This work has been carried out as part of the Reducing Risk in
Aquaculture project. The Norwegian Research Council is acknowledged
X. Yang, et al.

as the main sponsor (project number 254913). We would like to thank

the

service company for providing operational data and insightful

feedbacks. We also thank Bjgrn Magnus Mathisen and Dr. Jeevith
Hegde for their assistance with data acquisition.

References

[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]
[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]

[18]
[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]
[24]

[25]

[26]
[27]

[28]

Olafsen T, Winther U, Olsen Y, Skjermo J. Value created from productive oceans in
2050. trondheim. Norway: SINTEF Ocean; 2012.

Statistics Norway. Aquaculture, 2018, final figures. https://www.ssb.no/en/jord-
skog-jakt-og-fiskeri/statistikker/fiskeoppdrett. 05.04.2020.

Holmer M. Environmental issues of fish farming in offshore waters: perspectives,
concerns and research needs. Aquac Environ Interact 2010;1:57—70.

Bjelland HV, Fgre M, Lader P, Kristiansen D, Holmen IM, Fredheim A, et al. Exposed
aquaculture in Norway. OCEANS'15 MTS/IEEE Washington: IEEE; 2015. p. 1-10.
Gardar J. Storms wreak havoc on marine harvest test cages. http://www. intrafish.
com/news/646806/storms-wreak-havoc-on-marine-harvest-test-cages. 30.05.2017.
Marine Harvest. Experience and challenges. SFI Exposed Days 2017.

Department of Defense. MIL-STD-882D, standard practice for system safety.
Washington, DC: U.S.Department of Defense; 2000.

Rausand M. Risk assessment: theory, methods, and applications. 1 editon Hoboken,
New Jersey: Wiley; 2011.

Yang X, Utne IB, Holmen IM. Methodology for hazard identification in aquaculture
operations (MHIAO). Saf Sci 2020;121:430-50.

Aasjord H, Geving IH. Accidents in norwegian fisheries and some other comparable
norwegian industries. IFISH 4 - The 4th international fishing industry safety and
health conference. 2009.

Fore HM, Thorvaldsen T. Causes for farmed salmon and trout escape during period
2010-2016. Trondheim: SINTEF Ocean; 2017.

Norwegian Food Safety Authority. Annual report 2016. Norwegian Food Safety
Authority; 2017.

EY. The norwegian aquaculture analysis 2017. Ernst & Young AS; 2018.

Finucane ML, Holup JL. Risk as value: combining affect and analysis in risk judg-
ments. J Risk Res 2006;9:141-64.

KV Storkersen, first Fish. Sharp end decision-making at Norwegian fish farms. Saf
Sci 2012;50:2028-34.

Ramezani R.An artificial intelligence framework for investigative reasoning
(Doctoral dissertation, Imperial College London).

Witten I.H., Frank E., Hall M.A., Pal C.J. Data mining: practical machine learning
tools and techniques 2016.

BayesFusion. GeNle. https://www.bayesfusion.com/.

Holen SM, Utne IB, Holmen IM, Aasjord H. Occupational safety in aquaculture —
Part 2: fatalities in Norway 1982-2015. Mar Policy 2018;96:193-9,

Holmen IM, Utne IB, Haugen S. Risk assessments in the Norwegian aquaculture
industry: status and improved practice. Aquacult Eng 2018;83:65-75.

© Jensen, T Dempster, Thorstad E, Uglem I, Fredheim A. Escapes of fishes from
Norwegian sea-cage aquaculture: causes, consequences and prevention. Aquac
Environ Interact 2010;1:71-83.

Ministry of Fisheries and Coastal Affairs. Report from the working group established
by the Ministry of Fisheries and Coastal Affairs (In Norwegian). Minist Fisher
Coastal Affiars 2012.

Thorvaldsen T, Holmen IM, Moe HK. The escape of fish from Norwegian fish farms:
causes, risks and the influence of organisational aspects. Mar Policy 2015;55:33-8.
NRK. Drove the boat into the fish farm (In Norwegian). https://www.nrk.no/
hordaland/kjorte-baten-inn-i-oppdrettsanlegg-1.12366000. 10.20.2017.

Reuters. Up to 80,000 trout escape after cargo ship crashes into fish farm in den-
mark. http://gcaptain.com/up-to-80000-trout-escape-after-cargo-ship-crashes-into-
fish-farm/.

Li P.A theoretical and experimental study of wave-induced hydroelastic response of
a circular floating collar. 2017.

Shen Y, Greco M, Faltinsen OM. Numerical study of a well boat operating at a fish
farm in current. J Fluids Struct 2019;84:77-96.

Goerlandt F, Goite H, Valdez Banda OA, Héglund A, Ahonen-Rainio P, Lensu M. An
analysis of wintertime navigational accidents in the Northern Baltic Sea. Saf Sci
2017;92:66-84.

11

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]
[40]

[41]
[42]

[43]

[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
[55]

[56]

[57]

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107208

Wrobel K, Montewka J, Kujala P. Towards the assessment of potential impact of
unmanned vessels on maritime transportation safety. Reliab Eng Syst Saf
2017;165:155-69.

Chauvin C, Lardjane S, Morel G, Clostermann J-P, Langard B. Human and organi-
sational factors in maritime accidents: analysis of collisions at sea using the HFACS.
Accident Anal Prevent 2013;59:26-37.

Bye RJ, Aalberg AL. Maritime navigation accidents and risk indicators: an ex-
ploratory statistical analysis using AIS data and accident reports. Reliab Eng Syst
Saf 2018;176:174-86.

Norwegian Maritime Authority. Focus on risks 2018. 2017.

Ventikos NP, Stavrou DI. Andritsopoulos AJJoME, technology. Studying the marine
accidents of the Aegean Sea: critical review. Anal Results 2017;16:103-13.
Eleftheria E, Apostolos P, Markos V. Statistical analysis of ship accidents and review
of safety level. Saf Sci 2016;85:282-92.

Standard Norway. NS 9415 Marine fish farms - Requirements for site survey, risk
analyses, design, dimensioning, production, installation and operation. Pronorm AS
Postboks 252, 1322 Lysaker, Norway. http://www.standard.no.: Standards
Norway; 2009.

Holen SM, Utne IB, Holmen IM, Aasjord H. Occupational safety in aquaculture —
Part 1: injuries in Norway. Mar Policy 2018;96:184-92.

Lema E, Papaioannou D, Vlachos GP. Investigation of coinciding shipping accident
factors with the use of partitional clustering methods. Proceedings of the 7th in-
ternational conference on pervasive technologies related to assistive environments.
ACM; 2014. p. 42.

Krawczyk B. Learning from imbalanced data: open challenges and future directions.
Progr Artif Intell 2016;5:221-32.

Norwegian Meteorological Institution. Frost API. https://frost.met.no/index2.html.
Lader P, Kristiansen D, Alver M, Bjelland HV, Myrhaug D. Classification of aqua-
culture locations in Norway with respect to wind wave exposure. ASME 2017 36th
international conference on ocean, offshore and Arctic engineering. American
Society of Mechanical Engineers; 2017. VOO6TO5A5-VTO5A5.

Norwegian Directorate of Fisheries. Aquaculture. https://www.fiskeridir.no/
Akvakultur. 16.06.2017.

Han J, Kamber M, Pei J. Data mining: concepts and techniques. 3 ed Elsevier
Science; 2011.

Ekbal A. Improvement of prediction accuracy using discretization and voting
classifier. 18th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR'06). IEEE;
2006. p. 695-8.

Standard Norway. NS-EN 13000:2010 + A1:2014 cranes - Mobile cranes. European
committee for standardization; 2010.

Heide MA. Service vessels 2010 (In Norwegian). SINTEF Ocean; 2010.

NMI. Personal communication. Norwegian Meteorological Institute; 2018.

Time and date. Sunrise and sunset times — Norway. https://www.timeanddate.com/
sun/norway. 09/09/2018.

Cooper GF, Herskovits E. A Bayesian method for the induction of probabilistic
networks from data. Mach Learn 1992;9:309-47.

Buntine W. A guide to the literature on learning probabilistic networks from data.
IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 1996;8:195-210.

Friedman N., Geiger D., Goldszmidt MJMI. Bayesian network classifiers.
1997;29:131-63.

Bellolio MF, Serrano LA, Stead LG. Understanding statistical tests in the medical
literature: which test should I use? Int J Emerg Med 2008;1:197-9.

Little RJA, Rubin DB. Statistical analysis with missing data. Hoboken, NJ, USA:
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 2002.

Lo A., Chernoff H., Zheng T., Lo S-HJPotNAoS. Why significant variables aren't
automatically good predictors. 2015;112:13892-7.

Domingos P. A few useful things to know about machine learning. Commun ACM
2012;55:78-87.

Dasu T, Johnson T. Exploratory data mining and data cleaning. Hoboken, N.J:
Wiley-Interscience; 2003.

Yang X, Utne IB, Holen SM, Holmen IM. Implications from major accident causation
theories to activity-related risk analysis - an application to the Norwegian Atlantic
salmon farming industry. In: Haugen S, Barros A, Gulijk Cv, Kongsvik T, Vinnem J,
editors. Proceedings of the 28th international European safety and reliability con-
ference (ESREL 2018). editorsNORWAY: CRC Press; 2018.

Bouckaert R.R. Bayesian network classifiers in weka. 2004.
