Bus Inf Syst Eng 62(6):599-608 (2020)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s 12599-020-00656-x

CATCHWORD

m)

Check for
updates

The Energy Consumption of Blockchain Technology: Beyond

Myth

Johannes Sedimeir@®: Hans Ulrich Buhl - Gilbert Fridgen@®: Robert Keller

Received: 10 February 2020/ Accepted: 9 May 2020/ Published online: 19 June 2020

© The Author(s) 2020

Abstract When talking about blockchain technology in
academia, business, and society, frequently generalizations
are still heared about its — supposedly inherent — enormous
energy consumption. This perception inevitably raises
concerns about the further adoption of blockchain tech-
nology, a fact that inhibits rapid uptake of what is widely
considered to be a groundbreaking and disruptive innova-
tion. However, blockchain technology is far from homo-
geneous, meaning that blanket statements about its energy
consumption should be reviewed with care. The article is
meant to bring clarity to the topic in a holistic fashion,
looking beyond claims regarding the energy consumption
of Bitcoin, which have, so far, dominated the discussion.

Accepted after two revisions by Ulrich Frank.

J. Sedlmeir - H. U. Buhl - G. Fridgen - R. Keller

Project Group Business and Information Systems Engineering of
the Fraunhofer FIT, Bayreuth, Germany

e-mail: hans-ulrich.buhl @ fim-rc.de

G. Fridgen
e-mail: gilbert.fridgen@uni.lu

R. Keller
e-mail: robert.keller @ fim-rc.de

J. Sedlmeir (DX)

FIM Research Center, University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth,
Germany

e-mail: johannes.sedImeir@ fit.fraunhofer.de

H. U. Buhl - R. Keller
FIM Research Center, University of Augsburg, Augsburg,
Germany

G. Fridgen
SnT - Interdisciplinary Center for Security, Reliability and Trust,
University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Luxembourg

Keywords Blockchain - Cryptocurrency - Energy
consumption - Distributed ledger technology -
Sustainability

1 Introduction

Blockchain technology entered public awareness with its
first application, the cryptocurrency Bitcoin (Nakamoto
2008), which was established in 2009 and currently exhi-
bits a market capitalization of more than 100 billion USD.
In the last decade, blockchain technology has developed
significantly and is now implemented in a wide range of
scenarios, including Ethereum or Hyperledger Fabric,
which allow distributed platforms to function with
unprecedented versatility (Lockl et al. 2020). Conse-
quently, many researchers and practitioners have realized
that blockchain technology holds disruptive potential
beyond its use in cryptocurrencies (Beck 2018; Fridgen
et al. 2018a; Labazova et al. 2019). Generally speaking,
blockchain technology permits secure transactions to be
made without the involvement of intermediaries, and is,
therefore, appealing to individuals as well as to industry
and the public sector. However, Bitcoin still dominates
many people’s perceptions of blockchain technology.
Moreover, it is well-known that Bitcoin consumes an
enormous amount of energy (De Vries 2018). (Strictly
speaking, we cannot consume energy, but merely change
its form from valuable (e.g., electricity) to less valuable
(e.g., heat) energy. Nevertheless, we will stick to the
common usage of the phrase here.) Consequently, one
frequently encounters claims that the energy consumption
of blockchain technology in general is problematic (Truby
2018). Considering the current discussions regarding cli-
mate change and sustainability, these statements could

Q) Springer
600 J. Sedlmeir et al.: The Energy Consumption of Blockchain Technology, Bus Inf Syst Eng 62(6):599-608 (2020)

therefore inhibit or delay the widespread adoption of
blockchain technology (Beck et al. 2018).

This article challenges the common prejudices regarding
the energy consumption of the supposedly homogeneous
blockchain technology by providing a detailed analysis of
current scientific knowledge. It, thereby, addresses the
energy consumption of IS, in general a subject for which
BISE traditionally takes responsibility (Buhl and Jetter
2009; Schmidt et al. 2009). In particular, it also addresses
the need for a detailed investigation into the energy con-
sumption of blockchain technology, as pointed out in Beck
et al. (2017). In Sect. 2, we first provide some technical
background for Proof-of-Work (PoW) blockchains and
determine the level of their energy consumption. Using
these estimates, we illustrate that today’s PoW cryptocur-
rencies do, indeed, consume an amount of energy which
may be regarded as disproportionate when compared to the
currencies’ actual utility. However, we also argue that the
energy consumption associated with a widespread uptake
of PoW cryptocurrencies is not likely to become a major
threat to the climate in the future. In Sect. 3, we put these
results into perspective by presenting blockchains with
alternative consensus mechanisms. We illustrate that these
kinds of blockchain technology already consume several
orders of magnitude less energy than the first generation
PoW blockchains and that these blockchains, thus, largely
mitigate the energy problem. However, we argue that, in
addition to consensus, the redundancy underlying all types
of blockchain technology can make blockchain-based IT
solutions considerably more energy-intensive than a non-
blockchain, centralized alternative. In Sect. 4, we discuss
this issue and also give an overview of methods and con-
cepts which could further decrease the energy consumption
of blockchain technology. In Sect. 5, we illustrate our
findings by a first rough comparison of the energy con-
sumption of some non-blockchain, centralized systems to
that of basic blockchain architectures. We conclude with
with an outlook and suggested topics for further research in
Sect. 6.

2 Proof-of-Work Blockchains
2.1 Technological Basics

Bitcoin, the first application built on blockchain technol-
ogy, is a decentralized payment system in which all par-
ticipating computers (“nodes”) store a copy — or, more
precisely, a replica, since there is no distinguished master —
of the associated ledger. A ledger is commonly defined as a
collection of accounts, stating one’s current rights of
ownership of a particular asset — in the case of Bitcoin,
units of the eponymous cryptocurrency. The underlying

Q) Springer

technology, blockchain, provides a means to store infor-
mation chronologically and redundantly on a decentralized
database, and an agreement process through which the
nodes synchronize and modify their global state (“operate
transactions”) (Crosby et al. 2016). It is, therefore, not
exclusively suitable for use with cryptocurrencies, but can
be applied to many processes in which the involvement of
an intermediary such as a bank, a notary, or any (digital)
platform owner is not desirable.

Blockchains, in general, achieve this synchronization by
linking transactions to form batches (“blocks”) and adding
these, sequentially, to the existing linear data structure
(“chain”). Utilizing Merkle trees and hash-pointers, this
data structure is highly tamper-sensitive, making retro-
spective manipulations easy to detect. Agreement about
which new blocks to append is reached using a so-called
consensus mechanism. Anyone can run a node for the
common cryptocurrencies and participate in the consensus
mechanism of their underlying blockchains using public
key cryptography and hence without any form of regis-
tration. Consequently, blockchains underlying such open
systems, which allow for unrestricted access and partici-
pation, are termed permissionless. Since, on a permis-
sionless blockchain, the inclusion of a distinct entity to
provide accounts and passwords is not viable, authentica-
tion based on a public key infrastructure is highly suitable.
For such blockchains, a simple voting-based agreement
process based on “one man — one vote” is not secure, since
a potential attacker could simply create multiple accounts
to gain a majority and take control of the system; this is
called a Sybil attack (Douceur 2002).

Bitcoin’s key innovation was to provide a_ suit-
able consensus mechanism for the use in this scenario.
Specifically, Bitcoin combined several well-known con-
cepts from cryptography to form the so-called PoW. This
refers to the right to create a new block from a subset of
queued transactions when one finds a solution to a cryp-
tographic, computationally intensive puzzle. The process
of searching for a solution is called “mining”. This results
in coupling the voting weight to a scarce resource —
computing power and thus energy — and hence prevents
Sybil attacks. The mining process is economically
incentivized in that participants are rewarded for every
valid block that is found and disseminated. The reward
typically consists of a certain amount of the associated
cryptocurrency and the fees for the associated transac-
tions. The value of the former is proportional to the
cryptocurrency’s market price, so the success of cryp-
tocurrencies on financial markets in the last years has
provided a very strong incentive to participate in mining.
In turn, this has led to an enormous energy consumption
associated with the underlying PoW blockchains.
J. Sedlmeir et al.: The Energy Consumption of Blockchain Technology, Bus Inf Syst Eng 62(6):599-608 (2020) 601

It is essential to note that the high energy consumption
of PoW blockchains is neither the result of inefficient
algorithms nor of outdated hardware. Strikingly, such
blockchains are “energy-intensive by design’. It is their
high energy consumption that protects PoW blockchains
from attacks: Depending on the scenario, an attacker must
bear at least 25 to 50% of the total computing power that
participating miners use for mining — and, thus, the same
proportion of the total energy consumption (under the
assumption of equal hardware) — to be able to successfully
manipulate or control the system (Eyal and Sirer 2014).
Consequently, the more valuable a PoW cryptocurrency is,
the better it is protected against attacks, confirming that
PoW is, indeed, a thoughtful design.

2.2 General Estimates

Starting with the work of O’Dwyer and Malone (2014),
researchers have analyzed the energy consumption caused
by Bitcoin in numerous scientific publications over recent
years (Stoll et al. 2019). However, results regarding the
energy consumption of PoW cryptocurrencies and block-
chain technology in general are rare. Determining the exact
value for the energy consumption of a multitude of open,
distributed networks is a hard task because the precise
number of participants, the properties of their hardware,
and the effort which they put into mining are unknown.
Fortunately, however, one can obtain good estimates for a
lower and an upper bound of the energy consumption of
any PoW blockchain by following Vranken (2017) and
Krause and Tolaymat (2018): Since both the difficulty of
the cryptographic puzzles and the frequency at which
solutions are found are easily observable, one can calculate
the expected value of the minimum frequency of calcula-
tions (“hash-rate”’) needed to solve the puzzles as often as
observed. This gives a lower bound of the energy con-
sumption of an arbitrary PoW blockchain:

total power consumption > total hash rate 1

x min energy per hash. )
This estimate indicates the lower bound, reflecting the
likelihood that more solutions are found than disseminated,
that further computations — in addition to mining — are
being carried out, and that not every miner has the most
energy-efficient hardware.

Both the current hash rate of a public blockchain and the
energy efficiency of the most efficient mining hardware can
easily be retrieved from online material. However, one
must be aware that mining hardware is in general block-
chain-dependent because the algorithms used for hashing
can differ. For example, Bitcoin uses SHA256, for which
very efficient application-specific integrated circuits

(ASICS) exist, 1.e., chips that are highly optimized for
computing hash values and, thus, for solving the puzzles.
On the other hand, Ethereum was designed to prevent the
use of highly specific mining hardware, so general-purpose
GPUs can be used for mining. Note that (1) does not
depend on any other parameters and, therefore, gives a very
reliable lower bound. Entering the current numbers —
retrieved from Coinmarketcap (2020) and Coinswitch
(2019) on 2020-02-05 — into (1) yields a lower bound for
power consumption of 6.8 GW, which equates to an annual
energy requirement of at least 60 TWh. Alternatively, one
could, of course, also integrate the time-dependent lower
bound over the period under consideration.

One can also determine an upper bound for the energy
requirement of the mining process for a PoW blockchain,
assuming honest and rational miners whose utility from
mining is solely financial profit: Participation in the mining
process is only profitable as long as the expected revenue
from mining is higher than the associated costs:

mining rewards + transaction fees = tot. mining revenue
> tot. mining costs
> tot. energy consumption

x min.electricity price.

A few easy manipulations yield the desired upper bound:

total power consumption

 

block reward x coin price + transaction fees (2)
avg. blocktime x min. electricity price

As hardware costs represent a substantial part of the costs
side, and electricity prices vary significantly around the
globe, we cannot assume that the upper bound is very tight.
The block reward, i.e., the number of cryptocurrency coins
one receives for solving a puzzle, the price of a coin, and
current transaction fees are, again, publicly observable for
every PoW cryptocurrency, meaning that only sensitive
number which has to be estimated is the minimum elec-
tricity price. De Vries (2018), for example, argues that
0.05 LEP is a reasonable lower bound for electricity prices.
This gives an upper bound of approximately 125 TWh per
year for the energy consumption of Bitcoin, using data
from Coinmarketcap (2020) for 2020-02-05.

We repeated the calculation of the lower bound (1) and
the upper bound (2) for the remaining 4 PoW cryptocur-
rencies with market capitalization of at least 1 bil-
lion USD. Figure | displays the resultant ranges for their
respective energy consumption:

We see that the lower and upper bounds are, in general,
quite close and, therefore, represent a meaningful estimate
of the actual energy consumption for each of the 5 major
PoW cryptocurrencies. A manifestation of this fact could

Q) Springer
602 J. Sedlmeir et al.: The Energy Consumption of Blockchain Technology, Bus Inf Syst Eng 62(6):599-608 (2020)

Mm Market capitalization

Annual energy consumption
— (lower bound — upper bound)

be
oO
oO

be
oO

Market capitalization (Bn USD)
Annual energy consumption (TWh)

 

Total Top 5 Bitcoin Ethereum Bitcoin  Bitcoin —Litecoin

PoW Cryptocurr. Cash SV

Fig. 1 Market capitalization and the computed bounds on energy
consumption for the 5 highest valued Proof-of-Work cryptocurren-
cies. Note the logarithmic scale on the y-axis

be observed when in the course of a general drop in
financial markets due to the Corona pandemic, market
prices for Bitcoin dropped by up to 40% in March 2020.
This implies a drop of the upper bound (2) in our model by
the same rate, and, indeed, the total hash rate was observed
to drop by approximately 30% shortly after: Seemingly,
mining was no longer profitable for some miners at this
point (Beincrypto 2020). This incident also illustrates that
the upper bound is highly sensitive on the economic cir-
cumstances: Assuming that electricity prices dropped by
the same rate as the prices for cryptocurrencies — which is
in fact conceivable in an economic crisis — the upper
bound (2) would remain unchanged. On the other hand, if
electricity prices generally dropped by 50%, e.g., due to
decreased demand or increased feed-in of renewables, or a
rush for cryptocurrencies led to an increase of their prices
by 100% and, therefore, to a level that we have already
observed by the beginning of 2018, our upper bound would
double in each of the scenarios, and even quadruple if both
happened to occur at the same time. Consequently, we
learn that we cannot take for granted that the given upper
bound holds forever; it merely represents a snapshot for the
current economic situation.

We also observe that the expected energy consumption
of the 5 investigated cryptocurrencies strongly correlates
with their market capitalization, which makes sense since
parameters, such as block reward per time, are comparable
among the cryptocurrencies and total transaction fees are
generally low compared to block rewards. Moreover, the
total market capitalization for all other PoW cryptocur-
rencies is significantly lower than that of Bitcoin itself.
This indicates that the total energy consumption of all PoW
cryptocurrencies other than Bitcoin will fall below our
upper bound for the energy consumption of Bitcoin. A
more precise estimate could be obtained by applying (2) to
all remaining PoW cryptocurrencies. This would, however,
be a tedious task, as one would have to collect specific

Q) Springer

parameters, such as block reward and average block time,
for each PoW cryptocurrency, of which there are currently
more than 1000.

In both estimates, we have, so far, only taken into
account the energy consumption involved in mining, L.e.,
solving the cryptographic puzzles, and neglected the
energy consumption of the other tasks which have to be
performed on the participating nodes, mainly, validating
new blocks and updating their local databases accordingly.
This is, in fact, a reasonable approximation: for the lower
bound, we only lose some tightness. To justify the validity
of our upper bound, we argue that the energy consumption
associated with maintaining the nodes, mining excluded, is,
in fact, negligible compared to the energy consumption of
mining for today’s major PoW blockchains: To validate a
single block in today’s cryptocurrencies, every node must
typically download up to a few Megabytes of data and
perform as many as several thousand hash computations, as
well as a comparable number of corresponding computa-
tions and database operations. For example, in a 1 MB
block used in Bitcoin, there can only be a maximum of
around 2000 transactions. These are the leaves of the
Merkle tree and, therefore, give a total of 4000 hash value
computations and a similar number of corresponding
database manipulations and signature checks. By compar-
ison, finding a single block currently involves around 1073
hash computations to solve a puzzle in Bitcoin, around 102°
hash computations for Bitcoin Cash and Bitcoin SV, and
around 10!° hash computations for Ethereum and Litecoin.
Even for a million nodes — and taking into account dif-
ferences in efficiency between common and specialized
mining hardware, given that ASICS can be millions of
times more efficient than CPUs at computing hashes — the
energy consumption associated with mining is still orders
of magnitude higher than the energy consumption required
to maintain the nodes (De Vries 2018).

At this point, it is important to emphasize that further
increasing the energy efficiency of mining hardware would
not reduce a PoW blockchain’s energy requirements in the
long term: To keep the average time for solving a puzzle
constant, and, hence, to ensure the security and constant
functionality of the network, the difficulty of the crypto-
graphic puzzles is periodically adapted to the total com-
puting power of the network. Since energy costs outweigh
hardware costs in the long run, participants with improved
hardware can solve more puzzles at the same energy costs.
Other participants have to follow suit with the competition.
This, in turn, involves higher overall computing power, and
means that the difficulty of the puzzle needs to be increased
so that it is, on average, solved as frequently as before.
Hence, it is only in the (short-term) conversion phase that
positive effects are conceivable. In fact, competition in the
J. Sedlmeir et al.: The Energy Consumption of Blockchain Technology, Bus Inf Syst Eng 62(6):599-608 (2020) 603

mining hardware market, resulting from the hype around
cryptocurrencies, has dramatically increased the energy
efficiency of mining hardware in the last decade. In the
long term, it is to be expected that even with ground-
breaking innovation in the energy efficiency of mining
hardware, Bitcoin’s and other PoW blockchains’ energy
requirements will remain at the previous level unless the
remaining economic quantities on the right-hand side of (2)
change considerably.

2.3 Closing Notes on the Energy Consumption of PoW
Blockchains

In summary, our lower and upper bounds represent dif-
ferent approaches and use different quantities that have to
be estimated. Yet, these bounds are very consistent in the
case of all of the cryptocurrencies we investigated. For
example, we determined electricity consumption to be
between 60 and 125 TWh per year for Bitcoin. This is in
the range of the annual electricity consumption of countries
such as Austria (75 GWh) and Norway (125 GWh).
However, as cryptocurrencies currently process only few
transactions per second, the theoretical limit is typically in
the low two- or three-digit range, e.g., approx. 15 for
Ethereum and Bitcoin and 100 for Bitcoin Cash. This is
primarily determined by the parameters ’average block
time’, “minimum size of transactions’, and ’maximum
block size’ (Georgiadis 2019). Accordingly, a_ single
transaction currently requires enough electrical energy to
meet the needs of the average size German household for
weeks, or even months. By contrast, traditional payment
systems process, on average, thousands of transactions per
second, and as many as tens of thousands at peak times. In
their publication in “Nature Climate Change”, Mora et al.
(2018) extrapolate the energy consumption of a single
Bitcoin transaction to the order of magnitude required for
handling payments on a global scale. They claim that if
Bitcoin were to handle the number of transactions required
by a worldwide payment system, the associated emissions
alone would lead to a global temperature increase of 2 °C
in the coming decades. However — as has already been
pointed out in a critical "Matters Arising’ response by
Dittmar and Praktiknjo (2019) — when increasing the
blocksize and, therefore, the throughput, according to our
previous arguments, the energy consumption associated
with mining would remain constant, and the energy con-
sumption associated with the remaining tasks would still be
negligible. This means that, overall, there would be no
noticeable increase in total energy consumption. This
argument is, however, based on the assumption that the
economic quantities from the estimate of the upper
bound (2), namely, the prices for electricity and the
respective cryptocurrency, remain constant.

In practice, however, the blocks cannot be enlarged at
will. While in Bitcoin Cash, for example, the blocksize has
been increased by a factor of 8 (compared to Bitcoin)
without any problems, a significantly larger block size is
currently not practicable. This is because, the larger a block
is, the longer it takes for it to be propagated by the
worldwide blockchain network. This can have a negative
effect for latency (the time it takes to distribute a new block
to all nodes) and, also, security: More solutions to the
puzzles are likely to be found as a certain block propagates
through the network, splitting the honest miners’ resources
and, therefore, leaving the network more vulnerable to
attack. Moreover, not every household can afford a high
bandwidth and large hardware storage, so higher require-
ments can also lead to a lower degree of decentralization.
This trade-off has already been discussed, e.g., in Bitcoin
Magazine (2018). If, however, storage capacities (hard
disks) and network speed continue to improve worldwide, a
considerable increase in block sizes might be conceivable
in the future. This would enable higher transaction rates
without a noticeable increase in energy consumption.

Finally, for most PoW blockchains, the block reward is
not constant, but periodically halved, typically, every few
years. Since mining fees are currently negligible compared
to block rewards, the upper bound (2) is proportional to the
electricity price and block reward. Hence, if the prices for
crypto-coins and electricity prices remain at the same level,
one could even expect that in the long run, the energy
consumption of PoW blockchains will also halve in each of
these periods, until the rewards from mining are compa-
rable to the total transaction fees.

We conclude that, although the energy consumption of
PoW blockchains is arguably enormous in relation to their
technical performance, it does not represent an essential
threat to the climate, even if significantly more transactions
are processed in the future. Moreover, since the area of
application of most blockchains — and, in particular, the
major cryptocurrencies — is often far beyond payments,
plenty of opportunities for new ecosystems and business
models arise. An evaluation should therefore not only
compare performance metrics and energy consumption, but
also take into account the unique opportunities offered by
this technology.

3 Alternative Consensus Mechanisms

Fortunately, the PoW consensus mechanism, which — as
already described — was designed to be energy-intensive, is
not the only way to achieve consensus in a distributed
system. The probably best-known alternative for the per-
missionless systems required for cryptocurrencies and
other open decentralized applications is the so-called

Q) Springer
604 J. Sedlmeir et al.: The Energy Consumption of Blockchain Technology, Bus Inf Syst Eng 62(6):599-608 (2020)

Proof-of-Stake (PoS) consensus mechanism. In this case,
the weight of a participant’s vote is not tied to the scarce
resource of computing power, but to the scarce resource of
capital (see Sect. 2.1 on why coupling with a scarce
resource is necessary). More precisely, there is a random
mechanism (there are no truly random number generators
for classical computers, but, as a first approximation, this
heuristics provides a good indication. The pseudo-ran-
domness typically comes from a subset of the previous
blocks) that determines who is allowed to build (“mint”,
“forge”, “bake”’) and attach the next block. With the help
of this mechanism, the probability of being selected is
linked to the amount of cryptocurrency that the node has
deposited and locked (“staked”) for this purpose. The
deposit also incentivizes the node to stick to the rules of the
network, as any misbehavior detected will lead to the node
losing this deposit. The advantage of PoS is that it does not
involve any computationally intensive steps such as solv-
ing the cryptographic puzzles in PoW. The computational
complexity of PoS consensus is low and, typically, insen-
sitive to network size. It is, therefore, very energy-efficient
for large-scale systems. Accordingly, based on our argu-
ments regarding the energy consumption associated with
operating transactions in Sect. 2, the energy consumption
of PoS blockchains is several orders of magnitude lower
than that of PoW. It is primarily for this reason that the
community of the cryptocurrency with the currently sec-
ond-highest market capitalization, Ethereum, is trying to
switch from PoW to PoS. Other cryptocurrencies, such as
EOS, Tezos, and TRON — all of which feature in the Top
20 cryptocurrencies in terms of market capitalization — are
already successfully using PoS. There are, however, con-
troversial discussions in the community. Some argue that
getting rid of PoW’s energy consumption comes at the
price of security, e.g., because one can only accrue voting
weight (capital) from inside the system. However, one can
also argue that PoS has less of a tendency to centralize
(mining has economies of scale) and is, thus, more secure
in the long run. We will not enter in this discussion up here
but want to highlight that the outcome will likely decide
which consensus-type for permissionless blockchains pre-
vails and, therefore, impacts the energy consumption of
future open decentralized applications.

On the other hand, blockchain technology can also be
useful in constellations in which only a restricted group of
participants take part in consensus. These are referred to as
permissioned blockchains. They are of particular interest to
many industries and, also, to the public sector: participants
usually build a consortium, and there is a registration
process meaning that all of the participants in consensus
are known (Fridgen et al. 2018b; Rieger et al. 2019).
Therefore, it is not necessary to tie voting weight to a
scarce resource here, and one can reach consensus using

Q) Springer

some kind of election in which everyone has a single vote.
Therefore, this kind of consensus mechanism is sometimes
called Proof-of-Identity or, very often, Proof-of-Authority
(PoA). The term PoA usually involves different levels of
security, from mathematically proven and long-established,
fully fault-tolerant mechanisms (Paxos, PBFT) over
heuristically-secure algorithms, such as Istanbul BFT and
Aura, to basic crash-tolerant mechanisms such as RAFT
(De Angelis et al. 2017). Popular implementations of such
permissioned blockchains are Hyperledger Fabric and
Quorum. The more secure these PoA consensus mecha-
nisms are, the greater their complexity and, therefore, the
greater their energy consumption. For example, PBFT
consensus overhead scales at least quadratically with
respect to the number of nodes in the network and is hence
— by contrast to PoW and PoS — highly sensitive on the
network size. This, in turn, correlates with the energy
consumption associated with consensus.

Beyond these popular consensus mechanisms, there are
several more, an overview of which is provided by Eklund
and Beck (2019). An example is Proof-of-elapsed-time,
which intends to establish trusted random number genera-
tors through secure hardware modules. As PoS and PoA,
these further concepts typically do not involve a crypto-
graphic puzzle, except for some concepts which try to
establish some kind of “useful Proof-of-Work” which
solves puzzles that are in some way meaningful for busi-
ness or science. Since many of these types of consensus
mechanisms are not currently prevalent in relevant appli-
cations, and because they usually have low energy
requirements compared to PoW, we will not investigate
these consensus mechanisms in more detail.

The main result of the discussion about blockchains with
alternative consensus mechanisms is that, by getting rid of
energy intensity by design, their energy consumption is
orders of magnitude lower compared to PoW-blockchains.
Consequently, the energy consumption of non-PoW
blockchains can hardly be considered problematic for the
climate. Yet, beyond PoW and, thus, on a completely dif-
ferent scale, the type of consensus mechanism can have a
significant impact on energy consumption.

4 The Impact of Redundancy on Energy Consumption

We have already seen that a portion of blockchains’ energy
consumption relates to consensus, and another portion
relates to redundant operations. We have seen that for PoW
blockchains, the energy consumption related to consensus
outweighs the energy consumption associated with oper-
ating transactions, so the redundancy aspect is usually not
discussed in detail. For non-PoW blockchains, however,
the energy consumption related to consensus is no more
J. Sedlmeir et al.: The Energy Consumption of Blockchain Technology, Bus Inf Syst Eng 62(6):599-608 (2020) 605

enormous, and, therefore, the contribution to total energy
consumption by redundant operations may be significant.
Hence, it is not only alternative consensus mechanisms that
one should look at to further reduce the energy consump-
tion of blockchain technology, but also concepts which
allow reduced operation redundancy. Generally speaking,
the primary motivations behind all of the concepts pre-
sented in this section that may help to reduce redundancy
are increased scalability, throughput, and privacy for
blockchain solutions. Conveniently, these all happen to
reduce the degree of redundancy and, therefore, improve
the overall energy consumption.

We can distinguish between two approaches to reducing
redundancy: reducing the degree of redundancy, i.e., the
number of nodes that perform certain operations, and the
workload associated with operating a transaction. In
attempts to reduce the degree of redundancy, a concept
called sharding is often mentioned. Sharding is about
splitting the nodes in the network into subsets (“shards”)
and processing each transaction on only one of these sub-
sets. How easily sharding can be achieved largely depends
on the consensus mechanism. For example, sharding is
very difficult to apply to PoW blockchains, because one has
to make sure that, within a shard, computing power is
roughly equally distributed to maintain a balance of voting
weight among the associated nodes. In a PoS blockchain,
voting power is tied to the capital deposited by each node.
This information is publicly available and can, therefore,
be freely used in creation of shards. Other concepts to
reduce the degree of redundancy include off-chain payment
channels between two parties who repeatedly interact. Such
channels usually require a transaction on the blockchain, in
the course of which off-chain payment channels are created
and terminated. Ideally, however, all interim transactions
are operated purely bilateral and do not involve a trans-
action on the corresponding blockchain. That is to say that,
ideally, only balances, or accumulated deltas signed by the
members on the payment hub, are periodically recorded on-
chain. Payment hubs, a generalization of payment channels
to multiple parties, e.g., Nocust, or connections between
them, e.g., Lightning for Bitcoin or Raiden for Ethereum,
are the focus of active research (Gudgeon et al. 2019). A
similar basic concept is the use of sidechains (e.g., Plasma
for Ethereum). These are small blockchain networks which
periodically refer to the main chain as a highly reliable
root. Generally speaking, however, reducing the degree of
redundancy also makes a blockchain network more cen-
tralized and must, therefore, be carefully weighed against
concerns about security, liveness, and trust. Finding a good
compromise between these interests could enable a
reduction of the total workload in the system, and, there-
fore, a reduction of its total energy consumption.

On the other hand, the workload associated with
redundant operations, e.g., the verification of new blocks,
can be significantly reduced, which also mitigates the
redundancy issue. One very straightforward improvement
is, therefore, optimization of the computational complexity
of the used cryptographic algorithms, e.g., for verifying
signatures. Yet, this has some natural limits: Currently,
transactions are operated “naively” on all nodes in the
sense that all transaction-related data must be provided on-
chain and all nodes recompute every step on their own.
This could be significantly improved by storing and veri-
fying only short correctness proofs on a blockchain and
distributing the larger, plaintext data on another layer to the
relevant participants. In particular, SNARKS, STARKS,
and other (Zero-Knowledge-)Proofs of computational
integrity which require much less verification and com-
munication overhead on-chain seem very promising (Ben-
Sasson et al. 2019). This is because, unlike methods that
lower the degree of redundancy, these do likely not have a
negative impact on security because every transaction is
still verified by every node.

In summary, there are various ways to reduce the
intrinsic redundancy of blockchains and, therefore, to
reduce also their energy consumption. The relative energy
saving potential is, however, negligible for PoW block-
chains as the energy consumption of mining dominates all
other contributions. However, it may still be relatively high
for networks in which consensus is not energy-intensive, in
particular, if the network is large.

5 A First Comparison of Different Architectures

We can now use our results from the previous chapters to
make a first comparison of the energy consumption of
typical blockchain architectures. The role of consensus has
already been discussed in Sect. 3, where we suggested that
a major distinction should be made between PoW and non-
PoW blockchains, although the differences between other
consensus mechanisms might also be significant. On the
other hand, for small networks, redundancy does not add
much absolute energy consumption, particularly when
compared to the scale of PoW blockchains’ energy con-
sumption. By contrast, for large systems consisting of
many nodes, the natural redundancy in a blockchain can
lead to much higher energy consumption. If a PoS or
alternative non-PoW blockchain replaces Bitcoin or
another PoW cryptocurrency in the future, we have to
expect that there will still be tens of thousands of nodes.
Although the energy consumption of such a network will
be negligible compared to Bitcoin, it will, therefore, remain
high compared to a non-blockchain centralized system with
minimal redundancy (i.e., because of backups). Figure 2

Q) Springer
nN
i)
nN

108

10°

Approximate energy consumption per transaction (J)

Simple Centralized
server system

Enterprise Public Public
Blockchain Blockchain Blockchain
Non-PoW PoW

Fig. 2 A rough comparison of the order of magnitude of energy
consumption per transaction for different architectures. A simple
server can operate transactions with very low energy consumption. A
typical non-blockchain, centralized system in applications will use a
more complex database and backups, thus mildly increasing the
energy consumption. A small-scale permissioned blockchain as used
in cross-enterprise use-cases has a similar degree of redundancy, but
some additional yet limited overhead due to, e.g., POA consensus and
more complex cryptographic operations. A non-PoW permissionless
blockchain with a large number of nodes can already exhibit a
significantly increased energy consumption due to the high degree of
redundancy. However, compared to a major Proof-of-Work block-
chain, energy consumption is still negligible

illustrates this observation and gives a rough comparison of
the energy consumption of different architectures, using
selected centralized systems as a baseline. We decided to
display the energy per transaction. However, as discussed
in Sect. 2, this is not an ideal metric for PoW blockchains
but does correctly represent the order of magnitude.

We arrived at our estimates in the following way: A
simple key-value store such as LevelDB can sustainably
operate tens of thousands of transactions per second on
office hardware with a power consumption of less than
100 W (own measurements), which yields less than 10-7 J
per transaction. A more complex database, such as
CouchDB, with one backup still manages more than 103
transactions per second on the same hardware, resulting in
at most 0.1 J per transaction (own measurements). As an
example of a small-scale enterprise blockchain, we refer to
a Hyperledger Fabric architecture with 10 nodes, each on
cloud instances with 32 vCPUs and therefore likely con-
suming a few thousand Watts in total. According to
Androulaki et al. (2018), such a system can handle
around 3000 transactions per second, so we arrive at an
order of magnitude of | J per transaction. On the other
hand, an Ethereum full node on Geth which does not mine
consumes approximately 0.1 J for a simple payment
transaction, depending on whether or not idle power con-
sumption is taken into account (own measurements). This

Q) Springer

J. SedImeir et al.: The Energy Consumption of Blockchain Technology, Bus Inf Syst Eng 62(6):599-608 (2020)

seems low, but in a network of 10* nodes, which is
approximately the number of active full nodes in Bitcoin or
Ethereum, this amounts to approximately 10° J per trans-
action, which is already orders of magnitude more than for
the described centralized systems and small-scale enter-
prise blockchain. However, it is still many orders of
magnitude less than for the current PoW blockchains such
as Bitcoin with about 10° J per transaction. All numbers
given here should be taken with caution as they are highly
dependent on the precise architecture, security measures,
type of hardware, and other parameters. They should
therefore be regarded a ballpark estimate, and reliable
numbers have yet to be established. We suggest this
interesting topic for further work, including a more thor-
ough investigation of the role of consensus mechanism and
the energy efficiency of transactions depending on trans-
action type or choice of blockchain implementation. For
permissioned blockchains, this might be particularly rele-
vant when enterprises have to decide for or against a par-
ticular blockchain implementation.

6 Conclusion

In this article, we first analyzed the energy consumption of
today’s prevailing PoW blockchains, which underly most
cryptocurrencies. While their energy consumption is,
indeed, massive, particularly when compared to the num-
ber of transactions they can operate, we found that they do
not pose a large threat to the climate, mainly because the
energy consumption of PoW blockchains does not increase
substantially when they process more transactions. We also
argued that although the energy consumption of non-PoW
blockchains and in particular permissioned blockchains
which are used in enterprise context is generally consid-
erably higher than that of non-blockchain, centralized
systems, it is many orders of magnitude lower than that of
PoW cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin. We also observed a
close interrelationship between security aspects and the
choice of consensus mechanism and redundancy charac-
teristics, and therefore, energy consumption. Hence, we
conclude that further investigation in this direction, which
has many similarities to Vitalik Buterin’s “scalability tri-
lemma”, might help to find the best compromise between
performance, security, and energy consumption.

Our contribution demonstrates that the energy con-
sumption of blockchain technology differs significantly
between different design choices. Consequently, it is an
important dimension to consider during the conception of a
blockchain-based IT solution (Kannengiefer et al. 2019).
We argued that using blockchain technology with non-
PoW consensus — which is the case in an increasing
J. Sedlmeir et al.: The Energy Consumption of Blockchain Technology, Bus Inf Syst Eng 62(6):599-608 (2020) 607

number of business applications — already substantially
mitigates sustainability issues. However, we also illustrated
that due to consensus and inherent redundancy, blockchain-
based solutions in general still require more energy than
non-blockchain, centralized architectures. However, in
enterprise applications, blockchains are typically only one
part of a hybrid solution in which most processes are
operated via conventional IT, and little information which
is relevant to the remaining participants on the blockchain
is processed on-chain (Rieger et al. 2019). Reducing the
workflows operated on-chain to a minimum, therefore, also
mitigates concerns about the energy consumption. On the
other hand, we know from other areas of IT that significant
energy savings can be enabled by process optimization and
digitization. As there are plenty of scenarios in which
blockchain technology might finally turn out to be an
enabler of the further digitization of processes, the increase
in energy consumption of a specific blockchain must
always be weighed against the savings it provides. For
example, by enabling the digitization of supply-chain
processes, blockchain can substantially reduce the amount
of paperwork and transport, including air-freight (Jensen
et al. 2019), or allow for more targeted recalls, leveraging
many opportunities to reduce carbon emissions.

However, we still lack reliable information on the
detailed energy consumption of different non-PoW block-
chains. We also lack information on the quantification of
their energy-saving potential for specific use-cases. Toge-
ther, these remain a field for future work, which will
involve a more detailed analysis of the role of consensus,
as well as transaction-based overheads and efficiency, for a
large subset of the consensus mechanisms and blockchain
implementations available. It will also involve a discussion
about the compromise between the degree of decentral-
ization, security, performance, energy consumption, and
further metrics which are of importance for blockchain-
based use-cases. Based on such investigations and more
reliable numbers, and the development of the most influ-
ential blockchain use-cases in practice, we will finally be in
a position to decide whether or not the energy consumption
of blockchain technology outweighs the savings in a
specific scenario.

Acknowledgements Open Access funding provided by Projekt
DEAL. This work was supported by PayPal and the Luxembourg
National Research Fund FNR (P17/IS/13342933/PayPal-FNR/Chair
in DFS/Gilbert Fridgen. We also thank André Luckow, Alexander
Rieger, and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments
and support.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate

if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.

References

Androulaki E, Barger A, Bortnikov V, Cachin C, Christidis K,
De Caro A, Enyeart D, Ferris C, Laventman G, Manevich Y,
et al. (2018) Hyperledger fabric: a distributed operating system
for permissioned blockchains. In: Proceedings of the thirteenth
eurosys conference, pp 1-15

Beck R (2018) Beyond bitcoin: the rise of blockchain world.
Computer 51(2):54—58

Beck R, Avital M, Rossi M, Thatcher JB (2017) Blockchain
technology in business and information systems research. Bus
Inf Syst Eng 59(6):381-384

Beck R, Miller-Bloch C, King JL (2018) Governance in the
blockchain economy: a framework and research agenda. J Assoc
Inf Syst 19(10):1020—1034

Beincrypto (2020) Bitcoin’s hash rate retraces 40% this month, slips
under 100 ehash/s. https://beincrypto.com/bitcoins-hash-rate-
retraces-40-this-month-slips-under-100-ehash-s/. Accessed 26
Mar 2020

Ben-Sasson E, Bentov I, Horesh Y, Riabzev M (2019) Scalable zero
knowledge with no trusted setup. In: Annual international
cryptology conference, pp 701-732

Bitcoin Magazine (2018) What is the bitcoin block size limit? https://
bitcoinmagazine.com/guides/what-is-the-bitcoin-block-size-
limit. Accessed 05 Feb 2020

Buhl HU, Jetter M (2009) BISE’s responsibility for our planet. Bus
Inf Syst Eng 1(4):273-276

Coinmarketcap (2020) Top 100 cryptocurrencies by market capital-
ization. https://coinmarketcap.com/. Accessed 05 Feb 2020

Coinswitch (2019) Bitcoin mining hardware. https://coinswitch.co/
news/top- 10-best-bitcoin-mining-hardware-in-2020-latest-
review-and-comparison. Accessed 05 Feb 2020

Crosby M, Pattanayak P, Verma S, Kalyanaraman V et al (2016)
Blockchain technology: beyond bitcoin. Appl Innov 2:6—19

De Angelis S, Aniello L, Lombardi F, Margheri A, Sassone V (2017)
Pbft vs proof-of-authority: applying the cap theorem to permis-
sioned  blockchain. _ https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/415083/2/ita
secl18_main.pdf. Accessed 05 Feb 2020

De Vries A (2018) Bitcoin’s growing energy problem. Joule
2(5):801—805

Dittmar L, Praktiknjo A (2019) Could bitcoin emissions push global
warming above 2°C? Nat Clim Change 9(9):656—657

Douceur JR (2002) The sybil attack. In: International workshop on
peer-to-peer systems, pp 251—260

Eklund PW, Beck R (2019) Factors that impact blockchain scalabil-
ity. In: Proceedings of the 11th international conference on
management of digital ecosystems, pp 126—133

Eyal I, Sirer EG (2014) Majority is not enough: Bitcoin mining is
vulnerable. In: International conference on financial cryptogra-
phy and data security, pp 436—454

Fridgen G, Lock] J, Radszuwill S, Rieger A, Schweizer A, Urbach N
(2018a) A solution in search of a problem: a method for the
development of blockchain use cases. In: 24th Americas
conference on information systems, pp 1-10

Q) Springer
608 J. Sedlmeir et al.: The Energy Consumption of Blockchain Technology, Bus Inf Syst Eng 62(6):599-608 (2020)

Fridgen G, Radszuwill S, Urbach N, Utz L (2018b) Cross-organiza-
tional workflow management using blockchain technology-
towards applicability, auditability, and automation. In: Proceed-
ings of the 51st Hawaii international conference on system
sciences, pp 3507-3516

Georgiadis E (2019) How many transactions per second can bitcoin
really handle? Theoretically. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report
2019/416, https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/416. Accessed 05 Feb
2020

Gudgeon L, Moreno-Sanchez P, Roos S, McCorry P, Gervais A
(2019) SoK: off the chain transactions. https://pdfs.semanticscho
lar.org/4d5b/9fb 1c4205b6 10601 17e3c71b04464c2a1c77.pdf.
Accessed 5 Feb 2020

Jensen T, Hedman J, Henningsson S (2019) How tradelens delivers
business valuewith blockchain technology. MIS Q_ Exec
18(4):22 1-243

Kannengiefer N, Lins S, Dehling T, Sunyaev A (2019) What does not
fit can be made to fit! Trade-offs in distributed ledger technology
designs. In: Proceedings of the 52nd Hawaii international
conference on system sciences

Krause MJ, Tolaymat T (2018) Quantification of energy and carbon
costs for mining cryptocurrencies. Nat Sustain 1(11):711-718

Labazova O, Dehling T, Sunyaev A (2019) From hype to reality: a
taxonomy of blockchain applications. In: Proceedings of the
52nd Hawaii international conference on system sciences

Q) Springer

Lock] J, Schlatt V, Schweizer A, Urbach N, Harth N (2020) Toward
trust in internet of things (IoT) ecosystems: design principles for
blockchain-based IoT applications. IEEE Transact Eng Manag,
to appear

Mora C, Rollins RL, Taladay K, Kantar MB, Chock MK, Shimada M,
Franklin EC (2018) Bitcoin emissions alone could push global
warming above 2°C. Nat Clim Change 8(11):931—933

Nakamoto S (2008) Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash system.
https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf. Accessed 05 Feb 2020

O’Dwyer KJ, Malone D (2014) Bitcoin mining and its energy
footprint. In: 25th IET Irish signals & systems conference 2014,
pp 280-285

Rieger A, Guggenmos F, Lockl J, Fridgen G, Urbach N (2019)
Building a blockchain application that complies with the EU
general data protection regulation. MIS Q Exec 18(4):263-279

Schmidt NH, Erek K, Kolbe LM, Zarnekow R (2009) Sustainable
information systems management. Bus Inf Syst Eng
1(5):400-402

Stoll C, KlaaBen L, Gallersd6rfer U (2019) The carbon footprint of
bitcoin. Joule 3(7):1647-1661

Truby J (2018) Decarbonizing bitcoin: law and policy choices for
reducing the energy consumption of blockchain technologies and
digital currencies. Ener Res Soc Sci 44:399-410

Vranken H (2017) Sustainability of bitcoin and blockchains. Curr
Opin Environ Sustain 28:1—9
