 

robotics (mpPt|

Review

Advances in Finger and Partial Hand
Prosthetic Mechanisms

Erasmo Difonzo !®, Giovanni Zappatore *, Giacomo Mantriota 1} and Giulio Reina !*®

1 Department of Mechanics, Mathematics and Management, Politecnico di Bari, via Orabona 4,

70126 Bari, Italy; erasmo.difo@gmail.com (E.D.); giacomo.mantriota@poliba.it (G.M.)
BionIT Labs Company, Via Cracovia 1, 73010 Soleto, Italy; g.zappatore@bionitlabs.com
Correspondence: giulio.reina@poliba.it

check for
Received: 25 August 2020; Accepted: 29 September 2020; Published: 1 October 2020 g, updates

Abstract: Approximately 70% of the upper extremity amputations refers to partial hand loss with the
involvement of one or more fingers. Historically, this type of limb amputation has been addressed
adopting simple opposition designs that use the movement of the residual digit for grasping against
a fixed device. Nevertheless, in the last few years, technological advances, and the introduction of
modern computer-aided tools for the synthesis and functional design of mechanisms have led to
the development of smaller, more robust systems that are constantly improving body-powered and
electrically-powered prototypes. This paper surveys cutting-edge solutions proposed in research
or available on the market for single finger or partial hand prostheses. First, the main design
requirements are outlined. Then, a wide number of prototypes are detailed underlying advantages
and drawbacks. The overall goal is to create a solid starting point for the study and development of
the next generation of prostheses that can be developed to advance the current state-of-the-art.

Keywords: prosthetic fingers; partial hand prosthesis; robotics; functional design; mechanism
analysis; underactuation

1. Introduction

The development of a prosthetic finger or partial hand must necessarily have as its foundation the
anatomical study of the human counterpart allowing the complete recovery of the natural functions
of the latter’s residual limb. The complexity of the hand, and consequently of the fingers, lies in the
compactness and small size that it presents in front of a high dexterity, through which numerous
grasping modes are allowed. These features are implemented by the human hand with tendons
that transmit the motion generated by remote muscles, located in the forearm, to the various joints
of the finger phalanges, as explained in more detail in Section 2. Whereas many recent reviews
have been presented that refer to the design of complete robotic hands [1-4] and grasping research
trends [5,6], to the best of the authors’ knowledge a survey devoted specifically to the mechanisms
used for finger and partial hand prosthetic or rehabilitation has not been presented in the literature.
Various cutting-edge solutions that use both in body-powered and extracorporeal energy prostheses
will be surveyed: the objective is to generate a solid knowledge base about the multitude of existing
systems detailing advantages and disadvantages. It represents the starting point for the study and
development of all prosthetic solutions that can be developed to advance the current state-of-the-art.
To this aim, mechanisms derived from full prosthetic hands and that can be of interest for single finger
implementations are also listed.

In this research, the existing devices have been broadly classified in three categories: one-degree
of freedom (dof) mechanisms (described in Section 3), two-dofs mechanisms with one degree of

Robotics 2020, 9, 80; doi:10.3390/robotics9040080 www.mdpi.com/journal/robotics
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 2 of 29

underactuation (Section 4), and multi-dofs mechanisms (Section 5). Section 6 describes miscellaneous
solutions. Finally, relevant conclusions and indications for future trends are drawn in Section 7.

2. Technical Requirement Definition and Analysis

The key point for a good system design is to identify well what are the customer’s problems
and requests, and the technical requirements with which to fulfill them. Accordingly, a review of the
artificial fingers proposed in the academic and research field or already-available on the market is
necessary. Through an in-depth reading of patents and research articles, the criteria for evaluating the
performance of the mechanisms underlying the finger and partial hand prostheses have been obtained.
They can be divided into functional, grasp and physical characteristics.

2.1. Functional Characteristics

There are three major types of bones in the hand [7,8] including: phalanges, metacarpal and carpal
bones. Numerous muscles, ligaments, tendons, and sheaths can be found within the hand. The muscles
are the structures that can contract, allowing movement of the bones in the hand. The ligaments are
fibrous tissues that help bind together the joints in the hand. The sheaths are tubular structures that
surround part of the fingers. The tendons connect muscles in the arm or hand to the bone to allow
movement. In addition, there are arteries, veins and nerves within the hand that provide blood flow
and sensation to the hand and fingers. The high dexterity of the hand and fingers is implemented
through tendons that transmit the motion generated by remote muscles, located in the forearm, to the
various joints of the finger phalanges (Figure 1). The fibrous sheaths hold tendons in position and
close to the bones.

MIDDLE PHALANX

DIP JOINT PROXIMAL PHALANX

EXTENSOR TENDON

    
   
   

DISTAL PHALANX

 
 

FLEXOR DIGITORUM PIP JOINT
PROFUNDUS TENDON MP JOINT
FLEXOR DIGITORUM
FINGER ANATOMY SUPERFICIALIS TENDON

Figure 1. Finger anatomy [8].

Setting aside medical/anatomical aspects that can be found in many dedicated references, e.g., [9,10]
and in the pursue of an engineering functional scheme, each of the hand fingers can be seen as composed
of three phalanges, except for the thumb which has two but in addition it shows a more complex
mobility solution thanks to the two dofs of the trapeziometacarpal joint. All the digits are connected to
the metacarpals by five MCP (metacarpophalangeal) joints. What previously said results in a model of
hand that features twenty-one degrees of freedom (dofs), without the six dofs needed to position and
orientate the hand in the reference system, three of which in the wrist, since the following exposition
will focus on the fingers.

Amputation of a part of a hand may involve functional limitations for the amputee that are not
easy to recover by orthoses or prostheses [11]. Loss of portion of hand occurs through trauma or
congenital skeletal deficiencies: the former usually occurs along a straight line instead for the latter
case the pattern of absence is quite variable but usually different. Patients who suffer transphalangeal
amputation need no device but may desire cosmetic fingers; thumb amputation can be recovered
with prosthetic thumb; distal transmetacarpal amputee search both cosmetic hands and functional
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 3 of 29

devices same as proximal metacarpal amputation patients. The conventional approach to designing
anthropomorphic prosthesis often involves mechanizing biological parts. This method inevitably
introduces undesirable discrepancies between the human and robotic hands. The larger the level of
finger amputation, the higher the extent of dexterity loss.

During manual activities, fingers are typically used to push, pull, and manipulate objects.
The finger force is demonstrated to vary in a range of 30 to 110 N, respectively, from the little finger to
the thumb capable of exerting the maximum force [12]. In fact, it can be estimated that the relative
contribution of each finger to the total four finger force was approximately 41% (index), 32% (second),
20% (third) and 7% (fourth). In addition, a simple qualitative analysis of the hand structure reveals
that the fingers are all different length and widths [13]. In addition, there is not an equal distribution of
surface area on each finger and this may affect the contact stress, and subsequent force contributions of
each digit.

2.2. Grasp Characteristics

e Natural motion: the prosthesis must emulate the closure as much as possible than an
anthropomorphic hand. This ability is referred to as pre-shaping of the finger when contacting
with an object (Figure 2).

e Shape-adaptivity: the stability of each grasp pattern greatly depends on this characteristic that is
often obtained with an underactuated mechanism.

e Pinching motion: the distal phalanx remains straight or rotates in counterclockwise direction;
so, the fingertips of index and thumb are in front of each other. It results in an efficient grasp for
thin objects like keys or papers (Figure 3).

 

Figure 2. Prosthetic finger without (left) and with pre-shaping ability (right).

MCP

     
  
   

Proximal
px
Middle

PX DIP

Distal |
px

Figure 3. Pinching grasp modality.
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 4 of 29

e Stability: objects need to be grasped and manipulated safely with different shapes and surfaces
without failures, avoiding the ejection phenomenon (i.e., negative contact forces).

e Force isotropy: grasping should be fulfilled with a uniform distribution of forces, which allows
for example a light and stable grip of fragile objects. It is a significant feature for the prosthetic
finger mechanisms that adapt to the shape of the object’s body.

e Workspace: it depends on the number and length of the phalanges with which the prosthetic
finger is modeled. Most prostheses show a planar movement.

e Stiffness: it is the relationship between the actuation torque and the phalanx movement considering
the forces exerted by the object.

e Bond and adjustment (for body-powered devices): the residual finger must be wrapped effectively
by the prosthesis and be able to drive the prosthetic finger as a natural extension with an efficiency
ratio as close as possible to the unit.

e Accuracy in the required tasks.

e Time of extension and bend motion.

2.3. Physical Characteristics

e Weight: the lighter the better.

e Number of phalanges: it results from a trade-off between the increase in the number of
components making up the prosthesis, the improvement of the setting performance and the
increase in complexity.

e Compactness: it is defined as the ratio between the width and length of a finger. It is ideal to
achieve a ratio like human finger.

e Design flexibility: it is recommended versatility to the uniqueness of the user (finger size, size of
components making up the prosthesis).

e Biocompatible materials that avoid irritation due to prolonged use.

e Appearance: the amputation of the upper extremities involves a change in the external appearance
that can lead to psychological problems in the acceptance of one’s condition.

e Manufacturing process: it provides a prosthesis with the best values of the above parameters at
the most competitive cost considering the various production processes.

e Noisiness: the purpose of all prosthesis is to provide the functional result without attracting
undue attention to the user.

3. One-Dof Mechanisms

Most of the existing prosthetic fingers belong to the category of one-degree of freedom mechanisms,
whose different embodiments are collected in Table 1 and following tables. They generally rely ona
single or cascades of four-bar linkages, and consequently one general drawback is that the movement of
the whole finger stops if one of the phalanxes meets the surface of an object. In other words, the one-dof
mechanisms are hardly shape-adaptive.

The first considered solution is shared by two devices proposed independently by [14], that is
shown in the first row of Table 1, and [15]. The proposed four-bar comprises two crossing rockers
connected to the ends of a rod, which allows the distal phalanx, represented by a segment with a
fixed angle respect to the rod, to rotate. The prosthetic finger developed by Yeong-Jin Choi [16] uses
as well a four-bar linkage (FBL), and it takes advantage of the natural finger’s movement next to it.
The proximal ring serves as the anchoring point to the stump, while the middle ring drives the cross
four bar linkage.

The Toronto Bloorview MacMillan (TBM) model has been developed by [17] and it is shown in the
second row of Table 1. It consists of two coupled four-bar linkages with 3 phalanges, 6 links, 9 joints.
Components 1, 2 and 3 embody the 3 phalanges, whereas link 4, 5 and 6 are connecting elements,
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 5 of 29

which provide a natural motion to the prosthesis. The mechanism is implemented for each finger of
the TBM Hand which uses a single motor to actuate all digits.

About the work [18] that traces back to the end of 1900, the stub is placed in the socket B (refer to
the second row of Table 1). By bringing it towards the palm, the rock-shaft D raises all the levers H, I
and K. They actuate the ratchet L which in turn lifts the lever G and allows the second phalanx to rotate
relative to the first one. As the second joint is flexed, it operates the lever O obtaining the bending
motion of the third joint. The aim of dog N is to lock the finger in any desired position until released
by further movement of D.

The coupling of two four-bar linkages has been also discussed in [19,20] using 3 phalanges, 5 links
and 7 joints. About the finger [19], a first iteration of a five-fingered hand 3D printed prototype was
developed. A slightly more complex embodiment [21] has been proposed that features 3 phalanges,
20 links, 28 joints as shown in the third row of Table 1.

Table 1. Overview of one-degree of freedom (dof) actuated finger prostheses.

Reference Mechanism Notes

 

One
crossed
FBL

[14-16]

 

Quite
similar
leverages

[17,18]

 

 

Two
coupled
FBL

[19-21]

 

[20]

More recent and advanced finger mechanisms have been proposed by Thompson’s research
team through a portfolio of significant patents that are collected in the focused Table 2. The first
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 6 of 29

solution [22] is reported in the first row of Table 2 showing a four-bar linkage with 2 phalanges,
4 components, and 4 joints. This prosthesis is aimed at subjects with fingers that do not present
the distal interphalangeal joint (DIP) articulation. This prosthesis is therefore named Proximal
InterPhalangeal (PIP) driver. The proximal ring 112 is configured to be anchored onto the proximal
phalanx. It also presents a thinner version with only 3 elements and two cage rings to retain the distal
and proximal area of the PIP articulation. The residual part of the finger is wrapped and protected
by the prosthesis that develops externally. Note in this regard the H-shaped rocker 108. The latter
can assume any shape and configuration to better adapt to the needs of the user. In fact, there is a
patent of the same inventors [23], which uses instead a Y-shaped rocker (not shown in Table 2) aimed
to reduce the overall bulk of the prosthesis, gaining in compactness, slenderness and weight, but it
shows the drawback of a lesser versatility with respect to the size of the user’s residual finger (solution
adopted only for users with a relatively short intermediate phalanx or a limited residual part). In both
patents, the proximal 112 and the intermediate 104 components are designed with a circular section for
retaining the finger but they do not fit very well in some cases. The verification procedure requires the
insertion of shims to reduce the aforementioned gaps and prevent blurring and/or relative movements
between the finger and prosthesis.

Table 2. Patent family by Naked Prosthetics (https://www.npdevices.com/).

Reference Mechanism Notes

 

 

[25,26]

 

[25] [26]

A PIP driver prototype [24] has been also proposed, as showed in the first row of Table 2,
with therapeutic and/or protective aim for individuals, who have suffered an injury or any type
of inhibited articulation functionality to a finger segment with a very limited amputation or no
amputation at all; it ends with an opening 107 and allows the end of the digit to come out. For a
feeling of greater safety, the assembly is provided with the coupling tip 106b (not shown here) with a
hollow recess 123, suitable for accommodating the residual part of the finger and avoiding further
injuries and hypersensitivity. To avoid hyperextension, the prosthesis may be outfitted with hard-stops
(an example is the Y-shaped rocker 127).
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 7 of 29

A third more sophisticated prototype shows the connection of two inverse four-bar linkage [25]:
the proximal one consisting of two symmetrical rockers 318 and the tendon ring 328, and a “suspended”
one that is interposed between the latter and the distal part 316 with a proximal coupler 356 and a
rocker 358 passing through it. The links between the various elements and the hinged connections are
proposed below to make the images more explanatory:

310 (frame) — 324 — 318 (proximal rocker) — 322 — 356 — 360 — 316

Thompson et al. [26] have presented also a similar embodiment of MCP driver prosthesis for
the thumb. It has an anchor plate 102 that can be positioned above and adjacent the MCP joint by
means of a hand strap on the user’s palm to ensure the proper position of the prosthesis. The hand
strap and anchor plate are essential for the most important finger of the hand, responsible for the
success of any grasp. Quoting John Napier [27] “a hand without a thumb is at worst nothing but an
animated spatula and at best a pair of forceps whose points don’t meet properly”. In the same patent,
reference is made to a second simpler and less cumbersome or invasive prototype of the MCP driver
type, composed of one less element (therefore 3). The extreme distal part of the prosthesis is fixed and
can only be configured with secondary procedures and by tightening the screw 220. In common with
the previously reported versions, however, the distal ring 222, which must concentrically receive and
retain the user’s residual thumb, can be moved longitudinally along the slot 224 to accommodate the
user dimensions.

Most of Thompson’s patents are implemented with a pad in the lower part of the distal component,
which has a texture in silicone or other material to mimic the natural soft touch and provide a better
grip. In some cases, it is possible to install a touch screen mechanism that allows the user to interact
with capacitive touch screens which react to the body’s natural electrical current.

Besides Naked Prosthetics’ solutions, other thump prostheses have been proposed, as shown in
Table 3. The PIP driver prosthetic thumb [28], showed in the first row of Table 3, includes 4 components
coupled by hinged connections forming an inverse four-bar linkage with one dof. The substantial
differences from the previous solutions are the proximal element 3 and the addition of a cable 9
designed to give a more realistic curling motion.

Cable 9 starts from element 32 and reaches to the lower surface of the distal tip helping the flexion.
The inventor suggests the use of the patent as a brace by removing the wishbone-rocker 321, or as an
orthopedic implant. For the other fingers, the corresponding PIP driver is presented [26], along with
the MCP driver version (not shown here) comprising the driving component coupled through a ring
element to the anchoring system elements.

Patent BPFF (bio-mechanical prosthetic full finger) [29] comprises the MCP driver full finger
prosthesis consisting of 2 four-bar linkages. The proximal phalanges and the yoke element, which
drive the middle phalanges and make prosthesis to flex are added to the original mechanism. A thumb
strap connects the articulation component to the anchoring system. For more details, the reader is
referred directly to the figures in [29].

Developed by Hunter et al. [30], the drawing shown in the second row of Table 3 is fairly
self-explanatory: a motor 26 causes rotation of a screw and moves longitudinally to the proximal
element 24, along the slot 42, the screw nut boss 22 (hinge 21) forcing to flex the distal body 38 around
the hinge 36. In addition, in this case, a simple inverse four-bar system is used.

Section of the prototype [31], which does not entirely show the joint lock 218, which can be
activated manually, to switch from the flexing mode of the finger to that of gripping by means of the
pincer system constituting the distal component 202.

The novelty introduced by Akhtar et al. [32] (third row) is to use a three-bar system and to exploit
the bending stiffness of element 104 as a third joint. A reduction of the mechanical hysteresis, greater
compactness and weight reduction is obtained especially by using a single body 100. This innovative
PIP joint achieves, besides the above-mentioned advantages, less energy dissipation by friction in the
hinges, better ease in manufacturing process of the single pieces and no need for lubrication.
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 8 of 29

Table 3. Prosthetic mechanisms designed for thumb prosthesis.

Reference Mechanism Notes

 

 

 

 

 

[28,29]
Guiding
[30,31] slot
Three-Bar
[32] linkage

 

4. Two-Dofs Mechanisms with One Degree of Under-Actuation

A mechanism is referred to as underactuated if it uses fewer actuators than the actual number of
dofs. The traditional actuators are replaced in these cases by passive elements including springs or
mechanical limits that, by definition, cannot be controlled but having small size and high simplicity
lead to a substantial reduction in the number of degrees of freedom and therefore the number of
actuators [33,34]. The underactuated joint of most of the proposed prostheses corresponds to the DIP
joint [35].

In the Southampton finger [36] (first row of Table 4), underactuation is implemented only for the
second phalanx through a wiffle-tree mechanism. The body has 3 components, 5 links and 9 joints.
The fingers of the Southampton Hand have been linked via the whiffle-tree equalizing mechanism too.
The finger of the TUAT (Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology) Karlsruhe hand [37] has
3 phalanges, 6 elements and no relative rotation before contact with the object. Bar A pulls plate D
and rotates the entire finger until the proximal phalanx reaches the surface of the body to be grasped.
At that point, plate D moves independently while the middle part is moved by rod B, then the four-bar
managed by rod C will allow a better grip. Based on this mechanism, the inventors constructed an
experimental model of the humanoid hand.
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 9 of 29

Table 4. Underactuated prostheses with 2-dof.

Reference Mechanism Notes

 

 
   

   
  
   
   
 
   

           

 

 

 

en Link-plate D ; SY 53
@) r * YY Presence
36) \\ | / : Link-rod B ” \\.4 22 ;
, \\| i \e ofa
adapted > ers i assive
P i & i w\-\ 40 Pp
from We 5 \ rotative
[37-39] | \\] E | 1, dtiving
| \ | 3
Lek d element
ace Link-rod C
FV 132
[36] adapted from [37] [38] [39]
[40]
At
a»/
Both with
linear rod
[41,42] and
torsional
spring

 

[41] [42]

Developed by G. Puchhammer et al. [38], a prosthetic finger is presented composed by three
phalanges and actuated by one motor. Inside the proximal member 10, there is a motor which
through the gears and a transmission clutch drives the spindle nut 85 mounted on the recirculating
ball spindle 80. The balancing arm 90 is fixed onto 85 and provides recesses 95 for levers 91 and 93.
The spring 94 is the passive element that generates underactuation in the event that the intermediate
member 20 (not shown) encounters an obstacle, and its rotation is stopped; as soon as the elastic
torsional resistance threshold is exceeded, the spring deforms and the balance arm 90 rotates allowing
the distal member 30 to flex, and correspondingly a more stable grasp. The invention [39] comprises
three main segments and a linear electric motor 132. The latter drives the slider case 40 implicating
rods 42 and 43 to activate the overall mechanism with regards to the pre-tightening force due to the
springs inside 40 and anchored to one side with the previous rods. Rod 43 is hinged connected to a
second segment and makes it rotate, while rod 42 makes third tip segment follow same movement
by means of the second trace 32, which is pivotally coupled with pin 22. Thanks to the presence of
passive elements (the springs), if an object hampers the second segment, the rotation is not stopped,
and the additional force applied by the linear motor allows the third segment to wrap around the
object. Second and third segment, rods 31 and 32 create a four-bar linkage.
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 10 of 29

Embodiment of only two phalanges with a single four-bar has been proposed in the SARAH
(self-adapting robotic auxiliary hand) prototype [40]: it has two dofs and only one actuator indicated
by the circular arrow, thus a spring is installed and keeps the finger stretched until the first phalanx
does not come into contact with an object. At that moment, the spring is extended allowing the relative
rotation of the two phalanges. The first aim was to develop a hand for space applications.

LISA (linkage indirectly self-adaptive under-actuated) [41] has a linear spring that keeps the
sliding block 4 in position. Under the pressure of the object, the plate 4 slides causing the distal 3
to rotate around joint axis 2. There are four components making up the system that represents two
phalanges. This mechanism together with [40] does not provide a natural motion of the phalanges
before the contact with the body. The LISA Hand has 5 fingers, 14 joint DOFs and only 5 motors:
the thumb has two joints, and each of the other four fingers has three joints.

The prototype [42] is a two-joint prosthesis capable to adapt to different shape objects. When the
output shaft of the motor 11 rotates, it makes the screw rod nut 51 to push linearly rod 5. Because
of the spring 9, the components 9 and 6 seem to be fixed together so they rotate for a certain angle.
The motion of rod 5 causes the second finger segment 4 to rotate around the joint axis 31. When an
object hampers first finger segment 3, the linear translation of the screw nut, and by means of it, the rod
5 can continue its driving effect. Even in this case, the underactuation is activated by the deformation
of a spring (component 9 in this case).

The first row of Table 5 shows the coupled and self-adaptive (COSA) finger [43]. It is obtained
from the combination of two consolidated rod systems: a rigid coupled linkage and a self-adaptive
underactuated linkage with the spring at the bottom. The first driving bar pushes the entire rigid system
to rotate, but when it approaches the object, the shape-adaptive function is activated. Embodiment
comprises two phalanges and 6 links: two more than [40] but ensuring a more natural movement.
The two-phalanx prototype developed by Stavenuiter et al. [44] shows a ternary system of rods at the
base in addition to [43] in order to change the level of adaptability of the mechanism. It reaches that by
means of adjusting the compliance, based on rotational stiffness of the input ternary links. The derived
grasper can increase its robustness against external force perturbations. The UnderActuated UA
finger [45] presented in the second row of Table 5 uses as the driving input the mechanical torque
applied to link 1 (it does not have the interchangeability that characterizes the patent [43]). A and B are
the MCP and PIP joints and once the link 3 is in contact with the object, the torsion spring 5 allows
under actuation to be activated (in this case BE and ED are collinear). A hand prototype with only
three fingers is proposed and analyzed.

With reference to the next row of Table 5, prostheses that take advantages of adaptive bar linkage
as the main element for underactuation are collected. Developed by Cheng et al. the artificial finger [46]
is composed by 3 phalanges and 8 components. It results in a two-dof (MCP and PIP joints) model with
passive DIP joint. Rod AB transmits the torque so the adaptive four-bar has a zero offset CD (spring
with zero deformation) as long as the proximal phalanx does not come into contact. With the proximal
phalanx blocked, the torque successively involves a translation of C, an extension of the spring, and a
rotation of the middle phalanx. The invention [47] is an FBL (10-13) body-powered prosthesis. It uses
the natural driving motion of an intact finger that wears the components 3-7. The most interesting
element in this solution is the elastic link 12, whose elongation allows the prosthesis to follow the
curling motion of the natural finger even if ring 3 is hindered by an object.

The adaptive finger [48] has been developed by Yang et al., and it is a combination of the
prostheses [40,43] featuring 3 phalanges and 6 links. It performs a curling motion similar to the one of
finger [37]. The driving motion of the fingers [49] is achieved by two four-bar linkages and a torque
motor with bevel gear transmission. The first one is composed by the base joint torque sensor 22,
the proximal knuckle link 23, the middle joint shaft 17 and the proximal knuckle 25. Therefore, when
link 23 is moved forward, the remaining two segments rotate. By means of the cross four-bar linkage,
made up of middle joint shaft 17, a coupling link 28, a fingertip 14 and a middle knuckle plate 26,
the third segment rotates relative to second one.
Robotics 2020, 9, 80

 

 

 

 

 

  
  

      
 
    

11 of 29
Table 5. Underactuated prostheses with 2-dof that combine more than one type of mechanisms.
Distal phalanx / |_| Second Driving Bar
_/ §§) Under actuation Bar
Adapted Proximal phalanx Wi First Driving Bar
from [43] § Decoupling Spring
lM Coupling Bar
Base
Passive
element on
[445] coupler.
One FBL
Adapted from [44]
Media Proximal
Distal phalanx phalanx
Adapted phalanx DIP 1 ~\ ; Adaptive
[46,47] P~ = fs bar linkage
pone °
Adapted from [46]
\ 24 a 25 54.26
\
\
i)
y 2 FBL: one
[18,49] is crossed
<c

 

[48]

 

Next, solutions using gears and/or belts are considered in Table 6 that are usually adopted to
provide precise grasp and transmission ratio at the cost of increased bulk volume. The finger developed
by Koganezawa [50] is reported in the first row of Table 6. The mechanism is composed of the DPGS
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 12 of 29

(double planetary gear system) and the compound closed linkage system assembled to form the three
phalanges of the underactuated finger. The shaft of solar gear transmits the rotation torque. The other
elements are the inner gear and the 3 planetary gears integrated in the carrier that keeps them at a fixed
angular distance. A spring system counteracts the carrier of the planetary gears to sustain the weight
of the finger and refrain the carrier from rotation under no external force loading (a). The clock-wise
rotation of the solar gear gives rise to the counter clock-wise rotation of the inner gear, coupled to link 1,
via the rotation of the planetary gears about their axes. Once the motion of the link 1 is hampered by
an object, further clock-wise rotation of the solar gears give rise to the orbital rotation of the planetary
gears around the solar gear along with the rotation of the carrier. Thus, link 2 is pushed forward
causing link 4 and 5 to wrap around the object.

Table 6. Underactuated prostheses with 2-dof that use gears and/or belts.

[50]

lanetary gears
inner gear

Carrier of the planetary gears

. .
a

 

[51]

 

The patent [51] (last row of Table 6) is an underactuated finger prosthesis. It mainly comprises
racks, gears, pinions, belts, and torsional springs. The prosthetic prototype is started when the active
slider 51 inside first segment 11 comes into contact with an object: the rack 41 drives the gear 43.
The spring 410 reacts in case the second segment 21 is obstructed, and further driving force given by
belt 49 allows curling motion of the third segment 3. The spring 42 may be incorporated only if one
wants a prosthesis that returns in the starting position after the interaction with an object.
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 13 of 29

5. Multi-Dof Under-Actuated Mechanisms

Some of the prototypes in this category are obtained simply by adding other elements to the
two-dofs mechanisms described in previous Section 4. These devices are collected in Table 7 and the
following tables. The first row shows the only MCP driver prosthesis, as proposed by the patent [52],
which has three phalanges with three dofs based on an underactuated mechanism that allows a natural
flexion of the prosthesis before coming into contact with the object, and it is finally implemented by the
residual part of the user’s finger (body-powered). The system consists of two five-bar mechanisms and
a four-bar linkage: the main elements are (upper figure) the proximal phalanx 110, the middle phalanx
120 and the distal 130 connected directly or indirectly through the auxiliary bracket 140, which is the
centerpiece of the prosthesis. The underactuation is carried out with two pairs of torsion springs 116
and 126, which join the ends of proximal phalanx links 112-114 and middle phalanx links 122-124.
Completing the entire body, 100 is the third middle phalanx link 128, which assists the rotation of the
PIP and DIP joints and the connection bracket 160. The latter connects the palm fixing part 150 and it
allows adduction and abduction.

Table 7. Underactuated multi-dof solutions.

Reference Mechanism Notes

 

[52]

 

 

 

 

The natural movement of flexion and extension is ensured by both the connecting pins and the
angles between the two pairs of links 112-114 and 122-124 (marked by the two arches), which are
limited by the spring elements so that two dashed virtual links are formed. When the system comes
in contact with an object, first, the proximal bar 112 and, then, the middle one 122 counteract the
opposite forces of the body M, resulting in an increase of the aforementioned angles; an extension of
the virtual links are extended, and, consequently, a relative rotation of the auxiliary bracket 140 is
obtained, enabling a shape-adaptive grasping. The same patent describes a robotic version (lower
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 14 of 29

part of Table 7) implemented with an electric motor that promotes the translation of point A along the
x-axis. The system is composed of a stacked four-bar linkage, a connecting rod-crank transmission
mechanism, three phalanges, three dofs, and as many as twenty elements involved.

The finger architecture derived from the LISA hand [41] has 3 phalanges, 3 dofs, 7 links and no
natural movement before contact (first row, Table 8). It corresponds to the modular version of the
mechanism previously encountered. On the left, the index, whereas on the right the thumb with two
phalanges SARAH hand’s finger [40] has 3 phalanges, 3 dofs, 7 links forming two underactuated
four-bar linkages and no natural movement before contact. Underactuated fingers are not efficient for
precise grasping of objects with different shapes, while one tries to have the distal phalanx parallel to the
others. A system that achieves this purpose is proposed alongside by combining two parallelograms
in series, and moving on a parallel plane respect to the shape-adaptive mechanism. Two springs
at the tip and at the bottom are used to allow the transition to the shape-adaptive grip. Developed
by Azlan et al. [53], the proposed prototype has 3 phalanges, 3 dofs, two underactuated four-bar
linkage implemented and 15 elements. It is a design oriented to develop a precision grip as well
as shape-adaptive. The mechanism is based on that of SARAH [40]. Activation of the micromotor
causes the distal phalanx pin to slide along the slot from point C to point B, and correspondingly a
counterclockwise rotation of both the proximal and intermediate phalanges. The underactuated grasp
capable of adapting to the shape of the object is achieved by keeping the pin in point C. In all cases, the
torque is transmitted to link 2.

The fourth row of Table & shows the finger solution developed by Mu et al. [54]. It results
in 3 phalanges, 3 dofs, 10 rods prototype assembled with parallelogram connection. It is the only
finger in this category where all degrees of freedom are implemented and it is included in this report
for completeness.

The model developed by Tae-Uk et al. [55] is showed in fifth row. It is a compound of 3 phalanges,
4 dots, two underactuated four-bar linkages and a five-bar system with spherical joints resulting in
a total of 11 elements. It does not perform natural movement before contact. It is mainly based on
the mechanism SARAH showed in second row of Table 8, and it allows abduction and adduction
movements. A similar model is described in [56] where a 3 dofs grasper is developed with articulated
active rollers at the fingertips, which provide steerable active surfaces. This allows unbounded rotation
of a grasped object without the need for finger gaiting.

The last row of Table 8 shows the Ca.U.M.Ha (Cassino-underactuated-multifinger-hand) [57]
finger. It has 3 phalanges, 3 dofs, two underactuated four-bar linkages coupled with a slider-crank
mechanism; the model results in 7 elements and no natural movement before contact. It is also based
on the prototype SARAH [40] and it differs from the latter exclusively for the connecting rod-crank
system. According to the proposed mechatronic finger design, a prototype robotic hand has been built.

A modified LARM hand [58] is proposed in the first row of Table 9. It results in 3 phalanxes,
3 dofs, two underactuated four-bar linkages with connecting rod-crank system and 6 components.
Two springs, one torsional and the other linear, ensure fixed angles as long as the prosthesis does not
come into contact with an object. When phalanx 1 is hampered by an object, torque on link 3 allows
the rotation of the phalanx 2, until it stops. The actuation force now is distributed onto the sliding
element 5, which involves the motion of phalanx 3.
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 15 of 29

Table 8. Underactuated multi-dof modular solutions.

 

 

   

 

       

 

[41]
Y,
[40]
ay .
F motor
point A micro-motor guiding slot
screw
phalanx’ s pin
[53]
proximal middle distal
phalanx phalanx phalanx
Adapted from

[54]
Robotics 2020, 9, 80

16 of 29

Table 8. Cont.

Planar Mechanism

§) Spherical Mechanism

Adapted from
[55]

 

 

 

[57]

Table 9. Underactuated multi-dof linkage solutions.

 

 

modified
[58,59] LARM
hand
[58] [59]
-- Driving Bar
¢=2— — 3h MCP
a uh _
Adapted 7e—— — ty
from [60]

@ Proximal phalanx
® Middle phalanx
DIP ® Distal phanlanx
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 17 of 29

Table 9. Cont.

Adapted
from
[61,62]

 

Adapted from [61]

 

Adapted
from [63]

 

[64]

 

Another mechanism modeled on that used in [20] is the one developed by Li et al. [59] that
presents 3 phalanges, 3 dofs, two underactuated four-bar linkages and 8 elements. It differs, with
respect to that of Licheng et al. [53], for the adoption of a torsional spring.

The second row of Table 9 shows the finger developed by Gopura et al. [60]: 3 phalanges, 3 dofs
and two underactuated four-bar linkage with 9 elements and 3 torsional springs. The underactuation is
calibrated by the different elastic constants of the finger springs (e.g., for the index 6:4:10:1). The driving
torque is applied to the driving bar. Upon compression of the first spring which increases its resistance
and hampers rotation of the proximal phalanx, as soon as the torsional resistance threshold of spring 2
is exceeded, the intermediate phalanx performs a relative rotation with respect to the proximal one.
Once even the intermediate one is prevented by the object, compression of the third spring (with an
elastic constant lower than the first two) will cause the rotation of the distal phalanx.

In the third row of Table 9 the models developed, respectively, by Hirano et al. [61] and D. Zhao [62]
are shown. The first one, derived from a hand grasper, has 3 phalanges, 3 dofs, two underactuated
four-bar linkages with 7 components. Furthermore, it does not perform natural movement before
contact with an object if the mechanism does not include the spring 0. It has a partial similarity with
the SARAH mechanism [40].

The second prosthesis [62] is a three joints version of the previously described prototype COSA [43].
It has an underactuated mechanism similar to that used by Y. Choi e D. Yoon for their prosthetic
finger [52]. The driving bar is 11, the rest of the working motion is self-explanatory. Developed by
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 18 of 29

Khakpour H. e L. Birglen, the prosthesis [63] has 3 phalanges, 3 dofs, rod transmission with 5 elements
and no natural movement before contact. Finally, the embodiment proposed in [64] describes a
underactuated human-like finger capable of multi-mode under-actuated grasping function. The switch
element is the telescopic link 24-26 between one mode and the other. If component 24 is locked,
the rotation of the large bevel gear 7 causes the near knuckle 2, middle knuckle 3, and far knuckle 4
to rotate as a whole entity. When an object hampers the motion, the underactuation mechanism is
enabled by passive elements that are the torsional springs on the rotation hinges 9, 13 and 18.

If the locking mechanism 26 is activated, the motion of finger resembles an anthropomorphic
rotation and facilitates the wrapping of the envelope of the object. This prosthesis presents the adaptive
bar of [46,47], coupled with torsional springs for each joint as [61,62].

6. Miscellaneous Mechanisms

In this section, prostheses that do not fall in the previous categories are discussed. The first
example (first row of Table 10) is the VINCENT System active patent [65] with a motor which allows
rotation of one four-bar linkage finger. Distal bend is obtained by the spring bar connections 8.
The VINCET passive patent [66] is showed as well to the right. It comprises one or two passive joints
which rotate around the 4’ axis.

The second row collects passive prosthesis ([67,68]): the flexion is done by assistance of another
hand or any rigid surface. In one embodiment of [68], the interlocking mechanism in the joint 30
comprises a rebounded type progressive hinge lock; when the bending angle exceeds 90-degree,
it rebounds and returns smoothly to starting point. The overall embodiment (full hand TBM) [69]
proposed in the third row of Table 10 take advantage from the sprockets and coupling worm gears
engaging each other. The picture is already self-explanatory: upon turning of worm 25 in one
direction or the other, the first finger section will be turned either into its open or closed position.
That happens because of lever 20, which is pivotally mounted to the worm-gear 24 by means of pin 18
and translates lengthwise.

The thumb mechanism is obtained in the same way, but it presents a differential bevel gear
system 62, which engages worm-gear thumb thanks to a conical friction face 54 and spring 57.
Chain-belt 35 passes around the main sprocket wheel 24 that drives all fingers by means of the
differential mechanism.

The embodiment developed by Guongling G. et al. [70] is a three-finger hand able to conform to
the different shape of objects being handled with only one drive motor. Shape adaptation is gained
through the pivotal connection of the central plate actuator 40 to the drive arm 58. The curling motion
of each finger is obtained by coupled gears whose motion is driven by arm 32 by means of the gear
wheel 42 at its end. The last model of the third row of Table 10 is a mechanical hand [71] that comprises
two finger elements 13 and 14. It may grip an object 11 only if the rods 28 of the actuator 27 are
driven downwardly. Consequently, the rods 25 are diverged and the mechanical fingers can pivotally
turn around the joints 15 making the forward ends 14 move. The latter collide into a table top so
while the rods 28 are further driven downwardly, the movements of elements 14 are hampered and
the closed link mechanisms 20 begin to modify their shape allowing the forward ends of the second
finger elements 14 to overcome the table top and eventually grip the object 11. Even if the object 11 is
positioned in a concavity, the current mechanism can grasp it.

Adequate treatment was not reserved for the cable driven systems collected in the last row of
Table 10 ([72-82]), mostly dedicated to full hand devices, since they mostly speculate on the method
of implementation than describing a real challenge for a new synthesized mechanism. The main
problem from which the various solutions were born is the routing scheme inside the prosthetic finger.
Notable examples of tendon-driven mechanisms for anthropomorphic robotic fingers can be found
in [83], where the equivalent actuator and tendon arrangement of the human lumbrical (LU) muscle is
achieved, and in [84], which implements tendon sheaths that work as a series of elastic pulleys to help
efficiently transmit flexion forces from the muscles to the joints.
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 19 of 29

Table 10. Miscellaneous mechanisms.

Reference Mechanism Notes

 

[65,66]

 

Passive
prosthesis
with
back-drivable

mechanism

[67,68]

 

Under
actuation
from the

wrist using
gears and
leverages

[69-71]

 

 

      
    

eo. Ars

——- =)
=! |
—

 

    
   
 

    

 
 
    
       
      

  

Za

SA
OO
SRR
SF

SRE en GG EI,
ee “7 — Y
TPES SDT ys
— 2 SOO Ss y

<>
6

NE

  

ZEXRKREN
SN
=
5 i Se
OS

oY =>
V2 ~~
Or} >
a
Ro
SO

Cable driven

[72-82] prosthesis

 

[72] [73] [74]

7. Discussion and Conclusions

The essential aspects drawn from the described prototypes have been reported in the previous
sections, highlighting their advantages and disadvantages in the projection of the future generation
prostheses to be developed. The summary Tables 11-14 provide at-a-glance view for the four categories
used in this review. In all tables, the second column highlights the type of actuation if externally
powered (EP) or body-powered (BP), providing information, where appropriate, about the driving
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 20 of 29

joint (MCPd, PIPd). The third column reports each type and number of assembled mechanisms
(C-FBL: coupled four-Bar linkage; U-FBL: underactuated four-bar linkage), whereas the fourth column
counts how many phalanges and links/components are mated in the assembly. The next two are check
columns where SA stands for shape-adaptive and NM for natural motion; both are useful evaluation
criteria adopted for the survey. The seventh and eighth columns lists the pros and cos of each solution.
The last part of the table is adopted for further notes.

As highlighted throughout this paper, the hand is a very important limb for the human being,
its ability and dexterity that allow the individual to carry out most of the daily activities severely
penalizes those who have amputations. The refusal to use some of the prostheses already available on
the market derives from the failure to align to the customer’s needs the requirements offered by the
product in terms of functionality, aesthetic recovery, weight, and cost.

All prosthetic fingers described in this survey can be further categorized based on the specific
actuation mechanism that can take advantage on: either body-powered or externally powered energy.
The former inevitably include additional elements required to: wrap the residual part of the finger,
be as comfortable as possible, and guarantee their connection in a stable way (for example the
circular shims used in [22-26] may be not efficient enough) sacrificing the compactness of the device
and the aesthetic-psychological impact that this could entail. Rigid body mechanisms are often
used, in body-powered prosthesis with their multitude of feasible configurations and integrations
(for example with cables as in [28,29]), allowing the transmission of larger grasping forces and a
back-drivable characteristic. On the contrary, the externally powered prostheses tend to use elements
that are more similar to human nature like cables for the transmission. In this way, they obtain a
considerable gain in the volume of space occupied by the prosthesis but produce lower forces and
introduce significant elasticity and friction. Both issues have an impact on the transmission efficiency
and the theoretical-physical modeling of the system.

In an attempt to create a simpler, more compact and lighter prosthesis that imitates the appearance
and natural movement of the fingers, many researchers have tried to reduce the dofs taking advantage
of the potential of the underactuated differential mechanisms. It is in this direction that researchers
have been moving in the past twenty years as the plots in Figures 4 and 5 testify.

Research trend

BH One DOF & TwoDOF (One DUA) © Three DOF (Two DUA)

 

Figure 4. Types of single finger prostheses developed in research during the last 20 years. DUA: degree
of underactuation.
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 21 of 29

Reasearch trend

@ WU-FBL @ C-FBL ®@ Five BL
© Stackable FBL B Slot transmission B Slider Crank

@ Linkage Trasmission

 

Figure 5. U-FBL: underactuated four bar linkage; C-FBL: coupled-FBL; BL: bar linkage.

The latest research trend is to adopt a two/three-phalange device with a single controlled movement,
whereas the other degrees of motion are underactuated; furthermore the tendency (Figure 5) reveals
the use of multiple mechanisms, stacked and integrated with springs and hard stops so as to create
different grasping configurations, and rehabilitate the amputated part.

It is worth mentioning that Figures 4 and 5 do not consider explicitly the users who have suffered
from partial finger amputation. Therefore, research trends may not fully reflect the real market needs.
In this respect, only about 15% of the research prostheses have turned into a market product and
adopted by medical operators, and among them the most adopted solution is that using one-dof and
underactuation (Figure 6). By collecting the impressions from interviewed clinicians and medical
operators, the main issues that ready-to-market solutions need to fulfill are: functionality that is
preferred by users over cosmetics, readily available and easily replaceable spare parts, lightness and
robustness, and the customization in response to the uniqueness of the user finger.

Market Trend

8 One DOF ®@ Two DOF (One DUA)

B Three DOF (Two DUA) © Miscellaneous

 

Figure 6. Types of single finger prostheses available on the market.
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 22 of 29

In general, increasing the degrees of freedom usually leads to fingers that are shape-adaptive
but also leads to an absence of natural movement. However, there are prostheses that integrate both
abilities, although testing and data collection have proved them commercially inappropriate. It is also
clear that as the components making up the prosthesis increase, and so the complexity, the ease in
making stable and functional grips decreases as well [41].

Regarding the addition of elastic elements, mechanical limit stops, and guiding slots, the superiority
of the latter against the introduction of undesired physical phenomena such as non-linearities and
permanent deformations of the former is undoubted, which ensures as well less maintenance and/or
repair and/or replacement.

It should be noted that the driver mechanism, which allows the finger motion, should preferably
be on the upper side of the phalanges. This is to avoid any mechanical interference between the object
under grasp and the mechanism [57].

Finally, in some patents (for example those presented in Table 2) simpler, lighter, less bulky
secondary models are available featuring a smaller number of elements and lower costs. However,
they are less protective, less robust, asymmetrical, and eccentric in some cases, and they certainly do
not introduce an aesthetical improvement (e.g., double ring that allows actuation with the help of
adjacent healthy fingers [16,25]).

One of the main advantages of the body-powered prostheses, which must be preserved in future
models, is the high versatility to the size of the customer’s fingers and to the degree of disability,
e.g., the type of actuation has been referred to as MCP or PIP driver to indicate the presence of the
corresponding joint in the residual part of the finger.

In conclusion, future research should be devoted to develop new body-powered prototypes
that can outperform existing state-of-the-art solutions. One notable example is that developed by
Y. Choi e D. Yoon [52], showed in the first row of Table 7, that is the only one-dof body-powered
prosthesis, which ensures both a natural motion and a shape-adaptive grasp thanks to its underactuated
mechanism. However, the patent results in a bulky, asymmetrical solution, and it is not suitable for
manipulate fragile objects. As matter of fact, the success of grasping largely depends on the bearable
critical load of the torsional springs before they compress and permit curling motion.

The second prototype family of interest is that developed by Naked Prosthetics (collected in
Table 2), which provides a different solution for what concerns the number of digits, price, drive
joint, aesthetic appearance, and anchoring. They are not as complex as the one strengthened by
Y. Choie D. Yoon even though they permit natural motion with a lower number of components,
earning in compactness and lightness. These devices try to solve the wrap problem of residual fingers
with the use of circular shims that represents a potential weakness and a field for future improvement.
All Naked Prosthetics devices comprise a linkage system, tip pad for interaction with touch screens,
nails for both aesthetic appearance recovery and rehabilitation of scratching and peeling functionalities.

Shape-adaptability in [52] is achieved via underactuation using springs. The set of solutions to
achieve the same goal is wide. An alternative and maybe better proposition could be the use of different
type of passive elements that overcome the disadvantages of springs or adopt an hybrid solution
like the DPGS by Koganezawa [50] or the one by MacDuff ([28,29]) that integrate tendon-cables to
improve curling motion. Furthermore, only few prototypes have implemented a precision pinching
grasp ([40,53]) but all of them are externally powered.

Therefore, future prostheses will have to face the challenge to design a solution that addresses all
the above-mentioned aspects.
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Robotics 2020, 9, 80 23 of 29
Table 11. Review at-a-glance one-dof prostheses.
N.
Index Type Mechanism Phalanges SA NM Pros Cons Notes
-Links
[14] EP One C-FBL 2-3 v Basic No High force
No back-drivable
[15] EP One C-FBL 2-3 v mechanism
limits Force
BP Follow NM Its motion is Similar to
[16] One C-FBL 2-4 v of finger next completely
MCPd ; [31,36]
to it, Basic dependent
[17] EP Two C-FBL 3-6 v Mimic NM
BP Dog “N” locking — Similar to
[18] MCPd One C-FBL 3-6 Vv system 41]
[19] EP Two C-FBL 3-5 v Hook “Pr Easy Ejection
[20] EP Two C-FBL 3-5 ¥ Mimic NM oe to
F Stackabl
7 ackable L
E [21] EP FBL 3-20 v Mimic NM Complex
a
© Compact,
& wrap around,
a BP 3DP, Shims, limit
y [22,23] PIPd One C-FBL 2-4 v adaptable, adaptability
O slenderness (Y-shaped)
(Y-shaped),
hard-stops
Same as [22],
[25] BP Two C-FBL 3-6 v improved More complex
NM
Same as [22],
Cable and
BP spring hinges Same
[28] One C-FBL 2-4 Vv P disadvantages of
PIPd for
. . Y-shaped [22]
improving
NM
[30] EP One C-FBL 7-3 y Accurate Wear of guiding
motion slot
[31] EP One C-FBL 2-4 V Joint lock to
switch mode
eae Narrow range of
[32] EP One C-3BL 2-3 Vv sstpakiot adaptability due
compact,

light

to link’s stiffness
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Robotics 2020, 9, 80 24 of 29
Table 12. Review at-a-glance two-dof underactuated prostheses.
N.
Index Type Mechanism  Phalanges Pros Cons Notes
—Links
right t SA between only
copay two phalanges,
[36] EP Two C-FBL 3-5 whiffle-tree
SA no natural
; uncurling motion
mechanism
One C-FBL, SA and NM
[37] EP One 3-6 Good grasp between only
multi-bar two phalanges
One U-EBL, Accurat tr ingly dee nd
[38] EP OneC-FBL, 3-7 wig oveprinke.
One DPGS ene On SPINS
property
One EBL Whiffle-tree SA between only = Similar to
[59] EP (balancing 3-7 SA two phalanges [25,36,37]
arm, slider) mechanism P 5 —
UA strongly
[40] EP One U-FBL 2-4 Basic, light depends on
spring property
[41] EP Sliding 2-4 Indirect UA Bulky
¢ Block
z Complicated
= Screw nut assembly: too Similar to
g [42] EP and a slider 2-6 Compact mates in narrow [41]
“I space
3 a
3 One U-FBL, Mimic NM, Same as [40]
[43] EP One C-FBL 2-6 can switch about spring,
s drive link bulky
S ;
2 [44] EP OneU-FBL 24 Adjustable
F compliance
w Same as [43],
oO unable to switch
[45] gp One U-EBL, 2-4 drive link,
One C-FBL lim
imited range of
motion
avy Performs Same as [43], SA
[46] EP acepuye 3-8 precision and between only
C-EBL, One wer er two phalan
C-FBL power grasp o phalanges
[47] BP One FBL 2-4 Fase ofuse  °+between only Similar to
two phalanges [46]
One U-FBL,
[43] EP One C-EBL 3-6 Same as [43]
UA strongly
depend on
Rack, gears, Accurate UA .
[49] BP belts, slider 3-8 motion Spring P FOP erty,
complicated
assembly
One spingle
and nut, Accurate Depends on
[50] EP One 3-7 ; torsional spring
. motion
balancing property
arm
Accurate SA between onl Similar to
[51] BP TwoC-FBL 3-7 motion, ¥
two phalanges [43]

compact
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 25 of 29

Table 13. Review at-a-glance multi-dof underactuated prostheses.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

N.
Index Type Mechanism Phalanges SA NM Pros Cons Notes
—Links
Performs Mower t
[40] EP Two U-FBL 3-7 Vv precision and emooemmen
ower eras of model
P 8rasp [40]
Modular
[41] EP SlidingBlock 3-7 39 v No NM embodiment
of model
[41]
Unable to
perform grasp of
152] BP Two U-5BL, 3.9 yoy vane NP fragile object, UA
MCPd = One C-FBL depends on
prostheses
torsional springs
properties
Two U-FBL Performs mi nse tor
[53] EP and a 3-15 v ¥Y _ precisionand Bulky, complex i sai ch
guiding slut power grasp grasp type
Parallelogram All DOFs are
[54] EP linkace 3-10 Vv v actuated by
5 motors
Two U-EBL 4 DOFs allow
€ [55] EP One spherical 3-11 v abduction Complex
Dn
S >BL adduction
SG
a Highly
& [57] EP Two U-FBL 3-7 VY adaptive Bulky
3 mech
= Upgraded
3
S [58] EP Two U-FBL 3-8 Vv Vv Good SA Bulky anc version of
P LARM [20]
Two ‘then [59) UA strongly Upgraded
[59] EP slider-crank 3-6 Vv Vv more case depends on version of
FBL solution spring property LARM [20]
UA strongly
depends on three
[60] EP Two U-FBL 3-9 yoo Pe
properties and
their compliance
ratio
UA strongly NM conf.
[61] EP Two U-FBL 37 y y depends on three named
springs caging
properties, bulky grasp
Linkage Mimic NM, Bulky, spring Three Joints
[62] EP 5 3-11 yoo can switch depending a
system drive link roperties [41], similar
peep to [61]
UA strongly
Linkage Less complex depends on two Similar to
[03] EP system $9 ” and bulky springs [40]
properties
Accurate
Link nd oe E, Sosfisticated, no
[64] EP “ese 3-10 vv oe NM if switch
gear system switch

. element is locked
element is

activated
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Robotics 2020, 9, 80 26 of 29
Table 14. Review at-a-glance miscellaneous prostheses.
N.
Index Type Mechanism Phalanges SA NM Pros Cons Notes
—Links
Passive
[65,66] EP  OneC-FBL 2-3 Compact, version
basic with one or
two joints
[67] BP SP ink lee 3-3 Adaptable Passive
Slenderness,
Interlocking compact, a ;
[68] BP mech. 1 light, ease Friction, passive
a J
5 solution
Vv
c .
x [69] EP Linkage and 3 Basic, ease from gears on
S gears system solution
A palm
= Accurate Same as 40, eas SA
[70] EP One FBL. Gears 3 - os 7 ©A8Y obtained by
motion ejection, bulky ;
wrist
; Able to avoid Bulky, ease
[71] EP Linkage system = 2/3-15/17 obstacles ejection
Slenderness, Complex routing
[72-82] BP —_Tendon-actuated 3 comp act, scheme and
light, ease manufacturing
solution process
Slenderness,
[81] BP —_Tendon-actuated 3 comp act, Aesthetic not
light, ease recovered
solution

Author Contributions: Conceptualization and Methodology, E.D., G.Z., G.M., G.R.; writing—original draft
preparation, E.D., G.R.; writing—review and editing, G.Z.,G.M. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.

Funding: The financial support of the projects: Autonomous DEcision Making in Very Long Traverses (ADE),
H2020 (Grant No. 821988), and Agricultural inTeroperabiLity and Analysis System (ATLAS), H2020 (Grant
No. 857125), is gratefully acknowledged.

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References

1. Neha, E.; Suhaib, M.; Mukherjee, S. Design Issues in Multi-finger RoboticHands: An Overview. In Advances in

Engineering Design; Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.: Delhi, India, 2019; pp. 335-343.

2. Sarac, M.; Solazzi, M.; Frisoli, A. Design Requirements of Generic Hand Exoskeletons and Survey of Hand
Exoskeletons for Rehabilitation, Assistive or Haptic Use. IEEE Trans. Haptics 2019, 1, 99. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

3. Rashid, A.; Hasan, O. Wearable technologies for hand joints monitoring for rehabilitation: A survey.
Microelectron. J. 2018, 88, 173-183. [CrossRef]

4. Piazza, C.; Grioli, G.; Catalano, M.G.; Bicchi, A. A Century of Robotic Hands. Annu. Rev. Control. Robot.
Auton. Syst. 2019, 2, 1-32. [CrossRef]

5. Grafia, M.; Alonso, M.; Izaguirre, A. A Panoramic Survey on Grasping Research Trends and Topics.
Cybern. Syst. 2019, 50, 40-57. [CrossRef]

6. Li, R.; Qiao, H.; Knoll, A. A Survey for Methods and Strategies for High-precision Robotic Grasping and
Assembly Tasks—Some New Trends. IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 2019, 24, 2718-2732. [CrossRef]

7. Health. Available online: https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/treatment-tests-and-therapies/anatomy-
of-the-hand (accessed on 30 September 2020).

8. Getting the Finger. Available online: — https://mddirect.org/tag/finger-anatomy/ (accessed on

30 September 2020).
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 27 of 29

10.

11.
12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

Thompson, J.C. Netters Concise Orthopaedic Anatomy, 2nd ed.; Saunders Elsevier: Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2010.
Doyle, J.R. Anatomy of the finger flexor tendon sheath and pulley system. J. Hand Surg. 1988, 13, 473-484.
[CrossRef]

Bender, L.F.; Koch, R.D. Meeting the challenge of partial hand amputations. Ortothics Prosthet. 1976, 30, 3-11.
Bretz, K.J.; Jobbagy, A.; Bretz, K. Force measurement of hand and fingers. Biomech. Hung. 2010, 3, 61-66.
[CrossRef]

Buryanov, A.; Kotiuk, V. Proportions of Hand Segments. Int. J. Morphol. 2010, 28, 755-758. [CrossRef]
Leal-Naranjo, J.A.; Torres-San Miguel, C.R.; Carbajal-Romero, M.F.; Martinez-Saez, L. Structural numerical
analysis of a three fingers prosthetic hand prototype. Int. J. Phys. Sci. 2013, 8, 526-536. [CrossRef]

Imbinto, I.; Montagnani, F.; Bacchereti, M.; Cipriani, C.; Davalli, A.; Sacchetti, R.; Gruppioni, E.; Castellano, S.;
Controzzi, M. The S-Finger: A Synergetic Externally Powered Digit with Tactile Sensing and Feedback.
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2018, 26, 1264-1271. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Choi, Y.-J. Finger Prosthesis. K.R. Patent 1020180096088A, 1 September 2016.

Dechev, N.; Cleghorn, W.; Naumann, 5S. Multiple finger, passive adaptive grasp prosthetic hand.
Mech. Mach. Theory 2001, 36, 1157-1173. [CrossRef]

Bashore, I. Automatic Artificial Finger. U.S. Patent 319,776, 9 June 1885.

Omarkulov, N.; Telegenov, K.; Zeinullin, M.; Begalinova, A.; Shintemirov, A. Design and analysis of an
underactuated anthropomorphic finger for upper limb prosthetics. In Proceedings of the 2015 37th Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Milan, Italy,
25-29 August 2015; Volume 2015, pp. 2474-2477.

Rodriguez, N.E.; Carbone, G.; Ceccarelli, M. Optimal Design of driving mechanism in a 1-D.O.F.
anthropomorphic finger. Mech. Mach. Theory 2006, 41, 897-911. [CrossRef]

Jang, G.; Lee, C.; Lee, H.; Choi, Y. Robotic index finger prosthesis using stackable double 4-BAR mechanisms.
Mechatronics 2013, 23, 318-325. [CrossRef]

Thompson, R.; Bengtsson, J.; Peto, A.C.; Macduff, C.C.; Minnis, S.T.; Klumper, E.D.; Crittenden, B.A.
Bio-Mechanical Prosthetic Finger with H-Shape Rocker. U.S. Patent 0239068 A1, 24 August 2017.
Thompson, R.; Bengtsson, J.; Peto, A.C.; Macduff, C.C.; Minnis, S.T.; Klumper, E.D.; Crittenden, B.A.
Bio-Mechanical Prosthetic Finger with Y-Shape Rocker. U.S. Patent 296361 A1, 19 October 2017.
Thompson, R.; Bengtsson, J.; Peto, A.C.; Macduff, C.C.; Minnis, S.T.; Klumper, E.D.; Crittenden, B.A.
Biomechanical Finger Brace Assembly. U.S. Patent 0020691 A1, 26 January 2017.

Thompson, R.; Bengtsson, J.; Peto, A.C.; Macduff, C.C.; Minnis, S.T.; Klumper, E.D.; Crittenden, B.A.
Bidirectional Biomechanical Prosthetic Full Finger Configured for Abduction and Adduction with MCP
Pivot and Multiple Finger-Ring. U.S. Patent 181870 A1, 29 June 2017.

Thompson, R.; Bengtsson, J.; Peto, A.C.; Macduff, C.C.; Minnis, S.T.; Klumper, E.D.; Crittenden, B.A.
Bio-Mechanical Prosthetic Thumb. W.O. Patent 035387 A1, 2 March 2017.

Napier, J.; Russell, N.J.; Russell, T. Hands; Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, USA, 1993; Volume 55.
Macduff, C.C. Bio-Mechanical Prosthetic Thumb. U.S. Patent 0303750 A1, 9 October 2014.

Macduff, C.C. Bio-Mechanical Prostetic Full Finger. U.S. Patent 0303749 A1, 9 October 2014.

Hunter, M.; Del Rey, M. Mechanical Finger. U.S. Patent 0235555 A1, 18 August 2016.

Martinez-Luna, C.H.; Michael, A.I.D.; Taylor, R.D.; Todd, R.F.; Thane, R.H.; Craig, M.K.; Kevin, E.K.;
Carlton, W.K.; Benjamin, D.P.; Todd, W.R.; et al. Prosthetic Fingertips End Effector. W.O. Patent 075031 A1,
18 April 2019.

Choi, K.Y.; Akhtar, A.; Bretl, T. Compliant Four-Bar Linkage Mechanism for a Robotic Finger. U.S. Patent
0328550 A1, 31 October 2019.

Massa, B.; Roccella, 5.M.; Carrozza, M.C.; Dario, P. Design and development of an underactuated prosthetic
hand. Mech. Sci. 2002, 1, 19-26.

Zappatore, G.A.; Reina, G.; Messina, A. Analysis of a Highly Underactuated Robotic Hand. Int. J.
Mech. Control 2017, 18, 17-24.

Zappatore, G.A.; Reina, G.; Messina, A. A Toolbox for the Analysis of the Grasp Stability of Underactuated
Fingers. Robotics 2019, 8, 26. [CrossRef]

Kyberd, PJ.; Light, C.; Chappell, P.H.; Nightingale, J.M.; Whatley, D.; Evans, M. The design of
anthropomorphic prosthetic hands: A study of the Southampton Hand. Robotica 2001, 19, 593-600.
[CrossRef]
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 28 of 29

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

Fukaya, N.; Toyama, S.; Asfour, T.; Dillman, R. Design of the TUAT/Karlsruhe Humanoid Hand.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Takamatsu, Japan,
31 October—5 November 2000.

Puchhammer, G.; Haslinger, M. Prosthetic Finger. U.S. Patent 0191343 A1, 29 July 2010.

Hua, L.; Sheng, X.J.; Zhu, X.Y. Underactuated Mechanical Finger with Self-Adaption to Shapes. C.N. Patent
103786161A, 14 May 2014.

Laliberté, T.; Gosselin, C. Underactuation in Space Robotic Hands. In Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Artificial Intelligence and Robotics & Automation in Space, Montreal, OC, Canada,
18-22 June 2001.

Li, G.; Jin, J.; Deschamps-Berger, S.; Sun, Z.; Zhang, W.; Chen, Q. Indirectly self-adaptive underactuated
robot hand with block-linkage mechanisms. Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf. 2014, 15, 1553-1562. [CrossRef]

Pan, Z.H.; Zhang, W.Z. Connection Rod Key Slot Type Coupling Under-Actuated Double-Joint Robot Finger
Device. C.N. Patent 102935642A, 20 February 2013.

Zhang, W.; Zhao, D.; Zhou, H.; Sun, Z.; Du, D.; Chen, Q. Two-DOF coupled and self-adaptive (COSA) finger:
A novel underactuated mechanism. Int. J]. Humanoid Robot. 2013, 10, 1330001. [CrossRef]

Stavenuiter, R.A.; Birglen, L.; Herder, J. A planar underactuated grasper with adjustable compliance.
Mech. Mach. Theory 2017, 112, 295-306. [CrossRef]

Li, X.; Huang, Q.; Chen, X.; Yu, Z.; Zhu, J.; Han, J. A novel under-actuated bionic hand and its grasping
stability analysis. Adv. Mech. Eng. 2017, 9. [CrossRef]

Cheng, M.; Jiang, L.; Ni, F; Fan, S.; Liu, Y.; Liu, H. Design of a Highly Integrated Underactuated Finger
towards Prosthetic Hand. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Advanced Intelligent
Mechatronics, Munich, Germany, 3-7 July 2017.

Zou, H.Y.; Song, H.X.; Zhang, H.M.; Sun, J.N.; Zhang, J.R.; Sun, J.; Wang, Q.; Yuan, B. Functional Finger
Prosthesis. C.N. Patent 104825259A, 30 April 2015.

Yang, D.P.; Zhao, J.D.; Gu, Y.K.; Wang, X.Q.; Li, N.; Jiang, L.; Liu, H.; Huang, H.; Zhao, D.-W.
An Anthropomorphic Robot Hand Developed Based on Underactuated Mechanism and Controlled by EMG
Signals. J. Bionic Eng. 2009, 6, 255-263. [CrossRef]

Huang, H.; Liu, H.; Zhao, J. Under-Actuated Coupling Transmission Type Imitation Human Finger
Mechanism. C.N. Patent 101190528A, 4 June 2008.

Koganezawa, K.; Kunugi, N.; Niikura, R. Backdrivable mechanism for artificial finger. IEAC Proc. Vol. 2011,
44, 8095-8100. [CrossRef]

Tian, L.; Zhang, W.Z.; Chén, Q.; Dou, D.; Sin, Z.G. Underactuated Drive Finger Device of Imitating Cascaded
Connection of Hand of Robot. C.N. Patent 101049695A, 10 October 2007.

Yoon, D.; Choi, Y. Adaptive Robotic Finger Prosthetis for Grasping Arbitrary Object Shape. U.S. Patent
0235782 Al, 23 August 2018.

Azlan, N.; Yamaura, H. Anthropomorphic finger with optimized geometric parameters for pinching and
grasping tasks. Mech. Mach. Theory 2012, 49, 52-66. [CrossRef]

Mu, D.; Huang, Z. A new type of paralle finger mechanism. In Proceedings of the International Conference
of Robotics and Biomimetics, Sanya, China, 15-18 December 2007.

Tae-Uk, K.; Yonghwan, O. Design of spatial adaptive fingered gripper using a spherical five-bar mechanism.
In Proceedings of the 2014 International Conference on Advanced Mechatronic Systems, Kumamoto, Japan,
10-12 August 2014.

Yuan, S.; Epps, A.D.; Nowak, J.B.; Salisbury, J.K. Design of a Roller-Based Dexterous Hand for Object
Grasping and Within-Hand Manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), Paris, France, 31 May—4 June 2020; pp. 8870-8876.

Rea, P. On the Design of Underactuated Finger Mechanisms for Robotic Hands. Adv. Mechatron. 2011, 6,
131-150.

Wu, L.; Carbone, G.; Ceccarelli, M. Designing an underactuated mechanism for a 1 active DOF finger
operation. Mech. Mach. Theory 2009, 44, 336-348. [CrossRef]

Li, X.; Lan, T.; Wu, L. Kinematics simulation for a new kind of underactuated robotic finger. Int. J. Model. Simul.
2017, 37, 234-240. [CrossRef]
Robotics 2020, 9, 80 29 of 29

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

7A.

79.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

Gopura, R.A.R.C.; Bandara, D.S.V.; Gunasekera, N.P.A.; Hapuarachchi, V.H.; Ariyarathna, B.S. A prosthetic
hand with self-adaptive fingers. In Proceedings of the 2017 3rd International Conference on Control,
Automation and Robotics (ICCAR), Nagoya, Japan, 22-24 April 2017.

Hirano, D.; Nagaoka, K.; Yoshida, K. Design of underactuated hand for caging-based grasping of free-flying
object. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE/SICE International Symposium on System Integration, Kobe, Japan,
15-17 December 2013.

Zhang, W.Z.; Zhao, D.Y.; Chen, Q.; Dou, D.; Sun, Z.G. Coupling Under-Actuated Integrated Three-Joint
Robot Finger Device. C.N. Patent 101722514A, 9 June 2010.

Khakpour, H.; Birglen, L. Numerical Analysis of the Grasp Configuration of a Planar 3-DOF Linkage-Driven
Underactuated Finger. J. Comput. Nonlinear Dyn. 2012, 8, 021010. [CrossRef]

Deng, H.; Duan, X.G.; Zhang, Y. Multimode Under-Actuated Human Finger Simulation Device with Quick
Reflex Grabbing Function. C.N. Patent 102873689A, 16 January 2013.

Schulz, S. Finger Element. D.E. Patent 10 2008 056 520, 3 May 2012.

Schulz, S. Finger Element with a Passive Joint. D.E. Patent 10214011554 A1, 2 November 2016.

Point Design LLC. Available online: https://pointdesignsllc.com/products/prosthetic-fingers/ (accessed on
30 September 2020).

Fong, T.D. Finger Prosthesis. U.S. Patent 0330432 A1, 27 December 2012.

Alberto, P.; Vincent, P.; Apel, F.H. Artificial Limb. U.S. Patent 1507682, 9 September 1924.

Guo, G.L.; Qian, X.K.; Gruver, W.A. Multi-Function Mechanical Hand. U.S. Patent 5378033A, 3 January 1995.
Itoh, H. Mechanical hand. U.S. Patent 3927424, 21 January 1974.

Jaworski, E. Humanlike Mechanical Finger for Prosthetic Hands and Massaging Device. U.S. Patent 0160873,
30 June 2011.

Traverso, S.; Lince, A.; Laffranchi, M.; de Michieli, L.; Boccardo, N. An Underactuated Prosthetic Hand. W.O.
Patent 215577 A1, 14 November 2019.

Masahiro, I.; Hiroshi, Y. Prosthetic Finger. J.P. Patent 146998A, 20 August 2015.

Akyiurek, E.; Kalganova, T.; Mukhtar, M.; Paramonov, L.; Steele, L.; Simko, M.; Kavanagh, L.; Nimmo, A.;
Huynh, A. Design and Development of Low Cost 3D Printed Ambidextrous Robotic Hand Driven by
Pneumatic Muscles. Int. J. Eng. Tech. Res. 2014, 2, 179-188.

Laliberte, T.; Baril, M.; Guay, F.; Gosselin, C. Towards the design of a prosthetic underactuated hand. Mech. Sci.
2010, 1, 19-26. [CrossRef]

Baril, M.; Laliberte, T.; Gosselin, C.; Routhier, F. On the Design of a Mechanically Programmable Underactuated
Anthropomorphic Prosthetic Gripper. J. Mech. Des. 2013, 135, 121008. [CrossRef]

George, L.E. Artificial Finger. U.S. Patent 2867819, 13 January 1959.

Carrozza, M.; Suppo, C.; Sebastiani, F.; Massa, B.; Vecchi, F.; Lazzarini, R.; Cutkosky, M.; Dario, P. The SPRING
Hand: Development of a Self-Adaptive Prosthesis for Restoring Natural Grasping. Auton. Robot. 2004, 16,
125-141. [CrossRef]

Partial M Finger. Available online: https://www.college-park.com/partial-m-finger (accessed on
30 September 2020).

Liberating Technologies. Available online: https://liberatingtech.com/ (accessed on 30 September 2020).
Massey, P.L.; Stormon, L.T. Hand and Forearm Prostheses. U.S. Patent 4291421, 29 September 1981.
Shirafuji, S.; Ikemoto, S.; Hosoda, K. Development of a tendon-driven robotic finger for an anthropomorphic
robotic hand. Int. J. Robot. Res. 2014, 33, 677-693. [CrossRef]

Xu, Z.; Todorov, E. Design of a Highly Biomimetic Anthropomorphic Robotic Hand. In Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Stockholm, Sweden, 16-21 May 2016;
pp. 3485-3492.

@) © 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
Ey

(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
