International Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering (IJ ECE)
Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020, pp. 6435~6445
ISSN: 2088-8708, DOI: 10.1159 1/ijece.v1016.pp6435-6445 O 6435

Analysis of threats and security issues evaluation
in mobile P2P networks

Ali Abdulwahhab Mohammed!, Dheyaa Jasim Kadhim?
‘Department of Remote Sensing, College of Remote Sensing and Geophysics, Al-Karkh University of Science, Iraq
Electrical Engineering Department, University of Baghdad, Iraq

Article Info ABSTRACT

Article history: Technically, mobile P2P network system architecture can consider as
a distributed architecture system (like a community), where the nodes or

Received Dec 21, 2019 users can share all or some of their own software and hardware resources

Revised Apr 16, 2020 such as (applications store, processing time, storage, network bandwidth)

Accepted Jun 5, 2020 with the other nodes (users) through Internet, and these resources can be

accessible directly by the nodes in that system without the need of a central
coordination node. The main structure of our proposed network architecture
Keywords: is that all the nodes are symmetric in their functions. In this work,
the security issues of mobile P2P network system architecture such as

ata (web threats, attacks and encryption) will be discussed deeply and then we
neryp tion propose different approaches and we analysis and evaluation of these mobile
Mobile P2P network P2P network security issues and submit some proposal solutions to resolve
Network security the related problems with threats and other different attacks since these
Web threats threats and attacks will be serious issue as networks are growing up
especially with mobility attribute in current P2P networks.

Copyright © 2020 Institute of Advanced Engineering and Science.
All rights reserved.

Corresponding Author:

Ali Abdulwahhab Mohammed,

Department of Remote Sensing, College of Remote Sensing and Geophysics,
Al-Karkh University of Science,

Baghdad, Al-Karkh Side, Haifa St. Hamada Palace, Iraq.

Email: ali_abdulwahhab @kus.edu.iq

1. INTRODUCTION

The first appearance of peer to peer concept was file sharing system, and according to the history in
1980, Usenet used the idea proposed by Tom Truscott and Jim Ellis (the creators of Usenet) in 1979 for
connecting the severs of the between each other without any central coordinate node, then it was followed by
several applications like the FTP server in the 1980's [1], and in the 1997 hotline produced the idea of file
exchange through the chat. However peer to peer system get its popularity and its true identity through
Napstar software by Shawn Fanning a freshman student who was to thwart because of the difficulty to locate
music'swhile a lot of peoples have it on their hard Disk so he created a software by taking advantage of a type
of real-time Internet text messaging well known as internet relay chat (IRC), important software publishing
property such as operating systems, and important search functions for different search engines named it
Napstar [wki. Napstar], after that a lot of applications followed like Gnutella, eDonkey2000 (in 2000),
Freenet (2001) and then followed 2003 by the bit torrent at 2002 [1].

The peer to peer model composed of many nodes that are acquired the self-organization
(decentralization) which also can act like a server or a client, that’s to say any node can provide resources or
receive them. The following properties shown below should be available for P2P model to acquire the self-
organization feature which it is most important feature for new network research trends such as loT, M2M,
5G communications and so on [2]. These properties are listed as follows: (1) Resource Participation: Each
peer in the P2P system contributes its resources with the other peer in the system, however must of P2P

Journal homepage: http://ijece.iaescore.com/index.php/IJ ECE
6436 O ISSN: 2088-8708

systems suffer from "free rider" and the "leechers" which i will explain them in peer to peer security section.
To achieve the first property, we can see is that the concept is similar to the "ad hoc networks".
(2) Self-Organization: All the peers are determining locally, that's to say all nodes gain the limited
information on set of the nodes that nearby [3]. (3) Networking: If we come back a little to the definition, we
will conclude that all the nodes in P2P system must be interconnected with each other. (4) Decentralization:
P2P is a system by which exchanging the information is done between the users themselves without any need
to use a high-performance node as a central control point in the system. Although it has benefit it would
represent a major security problem especially with the security we will see later. (5) Symmetry: All the nodes
in the system have the same functionality and any node can act like a server or client according to the needs
from that node. (6) Scalable: It means that the time of the response would not grow as the pees increase in
the system but the bandwidth will grow and that make the availability of the object become big. (7) Stability:
This is an important characteristic in P2P and many researches are dealing with property because at
maximum churn rate. Peer to peer system must be stable. So P2P’s client must know its network graph and
able to route the request of the demand's node within its practical hop-count bounds. Churn refers here to
either connection or disconnection of peers to and from the overlay network, which changes number of peers
in the network [4]. So churn rate may give the exact number of nodes or peers that leaves the P2P network
though a given time usually one hour. Really this is a big challenge to calculate the churn rate especially
large scale networks. In the other side, hop-count bound is the value of hope count as the massage request to
route forward between the peers before the system drop this request as no response for the request [5].

The main problem motivation of this work is the dealing with mobility at P2P Network while
ensuring that security functions and mechanisms still affect to be defined by influencing business operations,
and there will be trade-offs between circuit scale, wages, effectiveness, relevance, protection, and
privatization. In this work, security and privacy issues will be discussed and discussed to determine
the various security features used to provide privacy, safety, or provision functions. There are also some
issues associated to human's identities. These issues have to be considered for networking policies and
privacies, as they are necessary for effective general administration in the next technologies.

2. MOBILE P2P NETWORK MODEL

From the definition of the mobile P2P network, we can guess that it needs another system like
the Internet to provide connections and to exchange and share their resources which this is simply impossible
according to the global sharing of the information (by mean users for different places). Peer to peer system
uses the same concept as the Internet by the mean of the overlay networks. Overlay networks that a computer
network which its nodes are being considered they are connected by logical (virtual) links according to
the path that would be taken to reach its destinations that could be done either by one physical link or by
many links of the underlying layer [6] as shown in Figure 1. As for the Internet it is overlay on the telephone
network while P2P is overlay above the third layer (TCP/IP) on the application layer. So P2P System is an
overlay network over the Internet, in such a design using the overlay application layer for indexing and node
discovery and the direct Internet direct connection for exchange the information, as we mentioned P2P run
above the internet layer (TCP/IP) although such design allows the flexibility of communication and
the availability of the object in case of peer to peer system but it would represent a major security problem
with the decentralize of P2P especially defending against malwares and attackers [7] as will be discussed
later. Although the mobile P2P networks can be also classified asshown in Figure 2.

 

Figure 1. Overlay network over the main physical network

Int J Elec & Comp Eng, Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020 : 6435 - 6445
Int J Elec & Comp Eng ISSN: 2088-8708 O 6437

 

Information ‘ Information
Seeker —9§s Zag. Provider

\ / Informatio
Mediator
= ——. rs

     
 
   
 

Information
Provider

Information™ — @
Seeker
Unstructured P2P-Network (Gnutella) Structured P2P-Network (Chord)

ase’ iil Tracker

J

Informatio

Mediator é | 9 *

Ee Information o \
Index Mediator =, 7" |

Hybrid P2P-Network (eDonkey) BitTorrent

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

=

 

 

 

 

Figure 2. Different mobile P2P network structures

2.1. Structure mobile P2P network

A centralized system which it is a pure system that has in its distribution system each node knows
about all nodes and the way to reach all of them in that system by gaining a routing information using
key-based routing method [2, 8], in this mobile P2P network, the connection between the nodes are fixed and
each use indexing method to assign a location for each node in the system, and for the node who search for
a desire file (even if it is be very rare ) all he have to do is to route a search (using a protocol utilize for this
purpose) the network to know how many nodes that can offer the file to him (Pastry, CAN, Chord, Tapestry,
Napstar) [9].

2.2. Unstructured mobile P2P network

A decentralized system pure, easy to build, free scale, low power random mobile P2P network
which can be established arbitrary, each node (peer) in this system if he want to get a file he must flood query
in all the network to find how many nodes can offer his desired file, also the peer depend only on
the neighbor nodes to deliver the message to the other peers (Freenet, Gia, Gnutella, Fast track.....etc.).

2.3. Hybrid mobile P2P network

This network system consist of a high computing power ,performance and fast network connection
node or nodes act like a (server) usually called super node, this node/nodes job is to arrange the entire
network and assign the connection and location for the peers in the network (Kazaa, bittorrent) [2].

3. PROPOSED SOLUTION FOR MOBILE P2P NETWORK SECURITY

The goal this research work is to enhance the mobile P2P network’s security and then we want to
give a clear idea about how mobile P2P network is actually break the rule of the information security, well
that is right the way that the P2P work allows the mobile user's network to be open to the other users in the
network, which it will be expose to various type of attacking, theft and malware harm, also mobile P2P
network sometimes allows backdoor access to the user's system information. An example on theft like an
employee could steal a copyright material like software, files or (documents) of a company which they are
very confidential by using any of the (Wrapster) software which they are available in the internet to disguise
these files as an music files (mp3) and share it by the P2P to pass it through the company's system security
and anyone outside the company can download the file and unwrap it and he will get that material, also for
backdoor access and piggybacks if the software that is used for making the P2P communication if they are
infected with some kind of viruses could allow the hacker to gain access to the user's system information,
hard storage and bandwidth connections also for a high performance attacker he could infect may nodes in
the network (malwares) causing what called Botnet [10], which can lead also a Denial of service
(DDoS) [11, 12], also there are many types of attacking and also a lot some security mechanism are proposed
by the research which it will discuss literary in this work. So, our proposed solution for enhancing mobile
P2P network’s security can be constituted from three main parts web threats avoidance, P2P network attacks
avoidance and P2P network encryption.

Analysis of threats and security issues evaluation in mobile P2P networks (Ali Abdulwahhab Mohammed)
6438 O ISSN: 2088-8708

3.1. Web threats avoidance

Before giving the famous attacks on the P2P system, we would like to address the kinds of web
threats that they can expose the mobile P2P network as shown in Figure 3 below. We will show in this work
that these web threats can be avoided by two ways described below.

 

PEER TO PEER THREATS

[

EXTERNAL THREATS INTERNAL THREATS

a
General
Security

+— -
Adding and
nteroperability trust Removing
Users

ree |

y v 4 4 ry a ~
Bandwidth Encryption Plagybacking Confidentiality) |authentication

Blockage Bugs Malwares cracking and spying and privacy

 

Figure 3. Mobile P2P network threats types

3.1.1. External threats avoidance

By which means a threat that comes by the fact peer to peer system is a shard system which will
be exposed many threats and problems, and they are: (Theft, Bandwidth blockage, Bugs, Malwares, ...,
and so on). May be before reading the introduction theft problem would not be clear to the reader,
but actually it's a major problem cause a lot of companies loss of millions of money because it is easy way
without a lot of thinking and easy to implement with the free tools in the internet like the unwrapped.
If someone (employee) want to steal a confidential files [2], all he have to is to use the wrapster to disguise
the file into a music file and share it through P2Pnetwork as it will pass the company security system it will
appear like a common file transaction of music files and any one from the outside can download the file and
unwrap it and get the file, and you can get the result.

This work proposed the way that is P2P system uses for sharing and for searching cause the network
to suffer from the heavy traffic and sometimes an Accidental denial of service. For example the decentralized
unstructured P2P system, the client use a flood the query in the network for applying a probe to find how
many node having his request, another example when the users in that network share a large file size like
videos this may cause some logical links but many physical links, the first examples causes sometimes
networks drowning by the query and the second may cause of network heavy traffic and time delay. These
two examples give network bandwidth block out and sometimes an accidental DoS, sometimes bandwidth
blocking can come through a malware causes a flood of query in the system which caused what is said
distributed denial of service (DDoS) [11, 13]. This proposed approach can be described clearly by
the following flowchart as shown in Figure 4a below.

3.1.2. Internal threats avoidance

By which mean threat that come from the network itself and its nodes, these threat can be put as
a problems of the system more than threats. These internal threats are such (Interoperability, Adding or
removing users, Trust and General security). For running P2P applications properly, end users have to install
the required working program. If this program contains an error, the network may be exposed to a number of
risks such as endangering the exchange of network information and sometimes system crashes.

P2P systems specially the unstructured system allow many computers to connect with each other, and
If we talk about the safety of this large network, then we need a great deal of computing power is the coding
applied to it. Such an encryption algorithm is difficult to manage with a high-performance hacker. Many
researches deal with this problem. Some peer to peer application [2] gave its customers a freeaccount to
the documents that are stored in that account’s hard drive, this property give the hacker a good chance know
what operating system that user and get access to a confidential files of that user.

Int J Elec & Comp Eng, Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020 : 6435 - 6445
Int J Elec & Comp Eng ISSN: 2088-8708 O 6439

Different nodes use different operating system that's mean different firewalls, different applications
which create a complicated security requirement to satisfy all the nodes and determine the hackers in
the system. A good method should provide an effective way to joining-leaving nodes process to/from
the P2P network avoiding overloaded to the P2P system gaps. This means that most threats come from
previous nodes and theywhich know to enter and exit the system, for example trapdoors... etc. In all peer to
peer structures if a user request a file from the peers he cannot make sure it that peer is a trusted peer or it's
just a hacker or even an infected node so this and every time he download something he must scan the file,
problem make a lot of people do not depend on the P2Psystem to fulfill their needs. The proposed method to
avoid such internal threats is clearly described in the flowchart shown in Figure 4b.

    
       
    
   

     
 
   

Requests Arrived User presses key or
pastes text into form

field

  

If IP add. Of requests is

in Black list Drop the request

Check if the

Different web site
information entered

by the user is in the No

"watch" list
Phishing
alert

 
 

Is layout
If No. of requested similarity

     
 
     
  
 

Get more resources

   
   

>
resources <resource
threshold?

    
  

 

from provider available

  

Is the entered
information in the
"watch" list?

 
  

If requested resources
< Threshold (Ty)

  
      

Drop the request

  
  
    

  
 

Check the layout
similarity with the
trusted information

Does the domain
correspond?

  
  

Trusted web
site

    

Complete the
request

(a) (b)

Figure 4. Proposed solution flowchart for web threat avoidance:
(a) External threat avoidance, (b) Internal threat avoidance

3.2. Attacks on mobile P2P network system

Most of the attacking on the peer to peer system causes by malwares,P2P system like another
network system has a lot of attacker issues; however the most important attacks on the system according to
the last papers [10-16]. We found that it has weaken the system because as we mention P2P cross the firewall
boundary of clients computers, moreover for arranging the attacker that will adapt the concept of
classification of [17, 18] to create newer classification of the attacker. According to that research attacking
are classified into four basic class most of the attacks are under these four or a combination of them each
attack lead to the other, and they are shown in Figure 5.

There is a lot of attack can be produce by the combination of the last four basic attacks but we will
consider in our work the only most important called distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack. DDoS is
a famous type of attacks on the whole network systems that can be launched through many ways and all
the way will exhaust the sever by sending requests and not respond to it which will lead to system failure and
shutdown. According to [10], in P2P system DDoS can be launch by many ways (most of the attacks from
the basic class in the previous section) all of them will lead the node failure to serve the other peers in
the system. Here, we will submit our proposed solutions or ways of the DDoS attackers on the peer to peer
network system that can be described as follows:

- For the unstructured peer to peer system the attacker may use the query flooding nature so we will make
the malicious node to send a massive query to peers without responds the will cause bandwidth Busy and
overloaded which cause system to shutdown (flood DDoS [19]).

- A hacker can make use of the P2P properties(decentralized) by which make each node to act like a router
as like the malicious node which the attacker will use to forward the query to a victim node overloaded
him with query and closing that node [19].

- A hacker can use the infected peer to peer system so he can hack to other objects like web sites [19].

Analysis of threats and security issues evaluation in mobile P2P networks (Ali Abdulwahhab Mohammed)
6440 O ISSN: 2088-8708

- Another kind of attack that DDoS can perform is to inject useless data, such in centralized P2P, we can
inject a large amount of useless lookup-value pair into the index which will cause time latency which will
led to invalid query.

- The most DDoS can be launch by either toxicityindication or routing table indication. At the beginning,
a dummy record is inserted into the index indicating the target IP address and port number. When the peer
searches for resources, it will receive incorrect location information from the poison index. Establish
a connection with the target. If the target is accepted, DDoS for TCP connection will be started.
In the second case, each other's routing table contains its neighbors O (log n), these neighbors are granted
to the nodes in the network. The attacker deceives the peers and adds fake neighbors to each peer's
routing table. This can be as simple as sending an advertising message to the target. As a result, the target
receives a large number of communication requests [10, 14, 19].

 

P2P ATTACKS

—

   

unstructured query
ID Mapping flooding

Application \
attack
| costing
resource PF tf VN

retinal attack availability

       
  
  

    
     

Inconsiste
nt beMavior

 
 
   
   
 

Storage and

retrieval attack clips routing table
A ve others
pomoning

Distributed Denial |"

ol service (DDoS)

  
   
 

Figure 5. Mobile P2P network attacks types

By either one of these ways DDoS causes a massive harm to the P2P networks reducing
the availability distract the bandwidth totally cause system destruction. When an attacker control a node or
many nodes, he can launch many kinds of attack that are similar in harm to the network, such these attack
like (Wrong routing forward [10]: which mean that the according to the P2P system all nodes act like a router
and forward a massage between them for identification and localization, however each communication with
the infected node give wrong massage or forward it to none exists node. Also Identity theft [10] and Churn
attack [10, 14]: malicious node enter and exit the network continuously keep the network update its routing
table in order to get the stability ,in the end it will cause to system crush.

On the other side, Worms are already considered one of the dangerous attacks on the internet.
Nowadays, worms can infect hundreds of thousands of gestures within hours, and undoubtedly better
engineered worms will be able to infection to reach the same result in seconds. Moreover, worm’s
propagation is still unknown and many research designs for that purpose [13]. So, our work proposes
motivations that make the worm most uneffective attack, which:

- P2P networks are consisting of clients running the same software on their computers. If an attacker found
a hole in the security of the network, he can compromise the entire system.

- P2P nodes prefer to bond with many different nodes. In fact, P2P application worms no longer lose
the valuable time of other victims. You just need to bring the knot list to the victim and distribute it.

- P2P purposes are required to movebig files. Little worms must reduce its size to contain segment of TCP
packet. This problem can’t be considered in P2P worms and then can perform high sophisticated attitudes.

Int J Elec & Comp Eng, Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020 : 6435 - 6445
Int J Elec & Comp Eng ISSN: 2088-8708 O 6441

- Protocols are not generally seen to be dominant, and are therefore less concerned than intrusion detection
systems.

- P2P software usually runs on a personal computer rather than a server. Therefore, an attacker is more
likely to access sensitive files, such as credit card numbers, passwords, or address books.

- P2P applicantsusually transmit unauthorized content (copyrighted music, pornographic content ...), so it is
unlikely to report abnormal system behavior.

Most of these motivations give the attacker a purpose to apply worms in the system. However
worms are divided into two parts [11]: (1)Topology scanning: In this attack the worm utilize the information
from the nodes nearby the infected one this give the worm high speed for spreading. (2) Passive scanning:
This kind of worms infects the shared file in the infected computers and waits for the user to download to
replicate and infect more users.

Besides the attacking issues there is also the issues of trust which is means trusting that peer that he
will not expose my computer if make sharing with him. Does this sharing will jeopardize the communication
of my information? how can we recognize the good peer form the malicious peer all these questions will
implement by the Reputation based system [15]. Reputation is applied to make a reliability between its peers
based on its previous interactions and feedback from its other peers as shown in the strategy described in
Figure 6 below, as for the privacy it's need specially for the VoIP like Skype, when a node offer to help with
carrying the data stream which should be encrypted but there is no assurance of this also the P2P properties
means sharing with public and the private files so there some basic security like private P2P and (VPN)
system and the "anonymity" [20, 21].

     
   
  
      

 
    
    
 
 
 
 
 
      
   

send Request
for a File

+

receive a list of
peers

send Request
for a File

u

receive a list of
peers

+

select a peer
from the list

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

select a peer from
the list BASED ON,
REPUTATION.
METRIC

 

 

 

 

 

DOWNLOAD
THE File

DOWNLOAD
THE File

 

  
  

UPDATE
REPUTATI

  
 
   

UPDATE
REPUTATI
ON-DATE

  

REPUTATION SYSTEM
PEER TO PEER

Figure 6. Reputation system strategy Vs. P2P system strategy

3.3. Encryption in mobile P2P network system
Encryption mechanisms are used in P2P system for protection from the attacking with either encrypt
data stream or the connection to the other node, so that the attacking will be blocked and the attacker will fail

to obtain the data stream and there are basic encryption techniques used at P2P networks as follows [22]:

(1) Secret Key Techniques: Secret key technologies rely on the incident that the transmitter and receiveradopt
the secret applied in different encryption cases, e.g. encrypting and decrypting messages and creating and
verifying message authentication data. This secret key must be replaced in a separate procedure before
the intended connection (for example, the use of PKI).

(2) Public Key Technologies: They rely on the use of asymmetric key pairs. Usually, each user has only one
key pair. One spouse is provided to the public and the other is kept secret. Since one of them exists, there
is no need to exchange out-of-range keys, but the infrastructure needs to distribute the public keys in
the original way. Since no pre-connection secret is required before the call, public key technology is
well-suited to support security between previously unknown parties. When using public key encryption,
the public key will be used to encrypt the message, but the private key can only be used to decrypt

Analysis of threats and security issues evaluation in mobile P2P networks (Ali Abdulwahhab Mohammed)
6442 O ISSN: 2088-8708

the message. An asymmetric key pair can create the key pair mathematically linked to the secret private
key and the published public key. Using these keys, you can protect the validity of the message by using
the private key to create a digital signature for the message, which can be verified using the public key.
It also protects the confidentiality and integrity of the message [23].

In this work, before sending an encrypted data stream the nodes, we propose using some kind of
protocols to identify each other. On the other side, we propose that the nodes used between each other using
some kind of private network as an Internet overlay in which the resources and infrastructure are provided by
the users, and new users may only join the network by personal invitation, such a network applied to prevent
the attacker from enter the system. So, we proposed to adopt using the following two approaches of
encryption at mobile P2P networks as follows:

3.3.1. Proposed secure sockets layer protocol (SSLP)

Ensure that files and events sent are unchanged or invisible to anyone other than the intended
recipient. Additionally, since both parties use SSL, both parties will automatically verify their identities
before any information is sent over the network. The proposed protocol uses the same reliable technology
used by all major website operators to protect consumer privacy and financial information sent over
the Internet, and provides a mechanism to ensure confidentiality to prevent tampering with appropriate peer
secrets. The following diagram Figure 7 shows our proposed procedure for encryption mobile P2P network
using proposed secure socket layer protocol (SSLP).

c=)

= =

= —
& Client hello

Highest SSL Version, Ciphers Supported, Data Compression
Methods, Session Id = 0, Random Data

o Server hello

ion

* Selected SSL Version, Selected Cipher, Selected Data

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

=
Verify server cert, & Compression Method, Assigned Session id, Random Data. a
check cipher * Server Certificate 2
parameters * (Client Certificate Request) Zz
* Server Hello Done
Verify | rE
8 Key exchange € client 2
cert | ©
& Change cipher spec ss
oO Client finished 5
Indicate that x
further >
communication o ™
to server will be Change cipher spec
encrypted
© Server finished
© Encrypted data transfer P
~

Figure 7. Proposed diagram for encryption mobile P2P network using proposed SSLP

3.3.2. Proposed virtual private network (VPN)

This is kind of private network which is linked the peers in the underlying layer while encapsulating
the data and keeping it private. Our proposed VPN in peer to peer can be implemented with two kinds
of protocols:

- VPN with IPSec: IP security is useful because it is most suitable for networks with remote access clients,
and the security comes from the workstation's IP address or certificate (such as X.509), which specifies
the user's identity and ensures the integrity of the network. The IPSec tunnel is mainly used as a network

Int J Elec & Comp Eng, Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020 : 6435 - 6445
Int J Elec & Comp Eng ISSN: 2088-8708 O 6443

layer to protect all the data packets that pass through, regardless of its purpose. IPSec provides two data
protection mechanisms: Authentication Header (AH) and Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP), both
mechanisms use security associations.

- VPNs with cryptographic tunneling protocol: to provide confidentiality by blocking intercepts and packet
sniffing, we propose to allow sender authentication to block identity spoofing, and provide message
integrity by preventing message alteration.

Figure 8 shows the flowchartsof workingprocedures for our proposed VPN with IPSecand VPN with

cryptographic tunneling protocol respectively.

Source

   

 

TCP, UDP, others — (Application)
>
sc ee ce me ee ee ee ee ee r

 

   
 
   
   
 
  
 

 
   
 
 
 

Process AH, and if
processing is successful,
mark datagram as
AH protected.

Success

  

IP routing decision
IP source
address selection

Fail

  
  
    
    

   

Process ESP, and if
processing is successful,
mark datagram as
ESP protected.

  
    

Success

  
     
 

Protect packet
with ESP a Fail

   
     
      
   
 

Drop
ease

(TCP, UDP, others)

Was this

 

packet
protected
enough?

   
 

Self-
encapsulate
ESP tunnel-mode
(rarely done)

Duplicate IP header,
then protect inner
packet with ESP

ICMP processing

|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
| | Determine recipient
Protect packet | of the datagram
with AH
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|

 

leO, any normal device

Tunnel device
Tunnel interface: oe TCP, UDP,
Encapsulate IP Physical interface tunnel driver, others
datagram, then
reprocess through IP Hestnation

(a) (b)

 

Figure 8. (a) Proposed VPN with IPSec, (b) proposed VPN with cryptographic tunneling protocol

4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The research results of this work can be summarized as follows: Firstly, we introduced the mobile
P2P network architecture system so any one who read this research will know what this system is. Secondly,
we analyzed and proposed different solutions for this mobile P2P network threats and security issues.
Thirdly, we gave a literature review about some related works in this field and what they produced.
In the end as much we will speak about this network system, it will not be enough to cover the ideas on this
system and its security.

Moreover there is a lot of researches that dealt with P2P security to offer a high file transaction
performance with low latency, however P2P like any kind of computer network is under jeopardy as long
there is a people who want always to sneak access to the system, and no matter what security design and
mechanism are no match with skillful attacker, if he got enough time, he will find a way around these
designs. So security must always be a step ahead from the hacker thinking, well this thought is easy to think
and hard to implement.

Recently, some works were presented new ideas or implementation designs for different fields of
the security of the mobile P2P network system as follows:

The work [10] introduced an efficient new concept of classifications of the attacks on peer to peer
which they proposed that there is a relationship and most of the attack are actually are chain of multiple
attacks, this concept analyzed the attacking to improve the methods of security in P2P system. Work [13]

Analysis of threats and security issues evaluation in mobile P2P networks (Ali Abdulwahhab Mohammed)
6444 OF ISSN: 2088-8708

proposed a several models to understand the propagation of the malware and its behavior (Mathematical file
spreading model, Biological model, SIR model, SEIR Model and Empirical model) and subjected the last one
to the experiments aiming build model which cross over the malware propagation in order to develop
the trust among the peer and to create a reputation system that Predicts which peer is good and which is
infected.

In [24], this work proposed a new design to reduce the potential of worms and virus propagation by
a model called pricing model which it is built on a factor called Pearson coefficient as he stated in this work
that if Nodes wish to link to other nodes that are charged higher prices for choosing links that it has low
the Pearson coefficient, we can see this idea in many of p2p provider like NAPSTAR. In [25], this work
presented a new model called level model based on a quantitive strategy called PLIM. This model is based on
the mutual cooperation between the neighbors to determine the level of each peer in order to inhibiting
the DDoS in each peer.

In [26], this work proposed a new P2P system based on an (artificial immune systems [27]) to
defend the system against the flood DDoS, They propose that could be done by using AIS detectors as
a probe to check incoming traffic for anomalies. The Artificial Immune Systems are computational systems
inspired by the principles and processes of the vertebrate immune system. The algorithms in the AIS
typically use the immune system's characteristics of learning and memory to solve a problem [27]. Work [28]
dealt with Sybil attack which it is based on using Self-Registration with Judgment Evaluation (SRJE) that it
is a decentralized authentication scheme to utilize a local trust mechanism for self-registration in order to heal
the problem and they proved that the (SRJE) can inhabit the Sybil attack.

Some of the works that introduced in our research which deal with P2P network security had some
weakness issues for example the proposed work at [10] did not mention or discuss the behavior of
the malwares (like worms and botnet) that maybe by the responsible of all the attacks caused by malware but
from my point this is not true according to fact the flood DDoS is not malware and also worms and Botnets
in the end can cause DDoS. So we adapted this idea to produce my classification of Peer to Peer threats as
shown in Figure 3, also the idea is charged to link with the other in [25] that it is lost the meaning of P2P
system and give no difference with (client/server) model, as we reviewed many papers that come with this
idea of using the SJRE [29] that combined with a probe mechanism like PLIM in the [27] which this will
give each node a certain position and lower the probability of false registration and the ASI probe will
discover any kind of malicious behavior in the system.

5. CONCLUSION

The main contributions of this work can be listed as follows: (1) We proposed two avoidance
solutions (Internally and Externally) for web threats that facing mobile P2P networks, (2) our work comes
with new solution for DDoS attackers against mobile P2P networks as well as motivations that make
the worm most uneffective attacks. (3) Finally, we proposed two approaches of encryption at mobile P2P
networks: First approach is a procedure for encryption mobile P2P network using proposed secure socket
layer protocol (SSLP) and the second approach is a proposed VPN with IPSec and VPN with cryptographic
tunneling protocol respectively.

REFERENCES

[1] Li, James, “A Survey of Peer-to-Peer Network Security Issues,” 2007. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cse.wustl.edu/~jain/cse57 | -07/ftp/p2p/index.html

[2] Shen X.S., Yu H., Buford J. and Akon. M., “Handbook of peer-to-peer networking,” vol. 34, Springer Science &
Business Media, 2010.

[3] Singh K., Guntuku S.C, Thakur A. and Hota C., “Big data analytics framework for peer-to-peer botnet detection
using random forests,” Information Sciences, vol. 278, pp. 488-97, Sep. 2014.

[4] Stutzbach D. and Rejaie R., “Understanding churn in peer-to-peer networks,” In Proceedings ACM. 6th ACM
SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement, pp. 189-202, Oct. 2006.

[5] Capkun S., Hubaux J.P. and Buttyan L., “Mobility helps peer-to-peer security,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing, IEEE Press, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 43-51, Nov. 2005.

[6] Peterson. L. L. and Davie. B.S, “Computer networks, a systems approach,” Elsevier, Apr. 2007.

[7] Hamai T., Fujii M., and Watanabe Y., “ITU-T recommendations on peer-to-peer (P2P) network security,” Proc.
IEEE Symp. International Symposium on Autonomous Decentralized Systems, IEEE Press, pp. 1-6, Mar. 2009.

[8] Schollmeier R., “A definition of peer-to-peer networking for the classification of peer-to-peer architectures and
applications,” Proc. IEEE Symp. First International Conference on Peer-to-Peer Computing, IEEE Press,
pp. 101-102, Aug. 2001.

[9] Wallach. D.S., “A survey of peer-to-peer security issues,” In International symposium on software security,
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 42-57, Nov. 2002.

Int J Elec & Comp Eng, Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020 : 6435 - 6445
Int J Elec & Comp Eng ISSN: 2088-8708 O 6445

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]
[23]

[24]

[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]

[29]

Zeidanloo H.R., and Manaf A.A., “Botnet command and control mechanisms,” Second International Conference on
Computer and Electrical Engineering, IEEE Press, vol. 1, pp. 564-568, Dec. 2009.

Jhaveri V.J., Novik L. and inventors, “Security in peer to peer synchronization applications,” Microsoft Corp,
U.S patent, 7930346, Apr. 2011.

Singh, Rajendra G., "Sharing quality assured reusable learning objects on a peer-to-peer network with security
controls," Ph.D. dissertation, The University of the West Indies, 2019.

Schafer J., and Malinka K., “Security in peer-to-peer networks: Empiric model of file diffusion in bit torrent,”
Fourth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection, IEEE Press, pp. 39-44, May 2009.

Wang L., “Attacks against peer-to-peer networks and countermeasures,” InT-110.5290 Seminar on Network
Security, Dec. 2006.

Ali Aydin S., Ersin U., and Mark R.P., “A Reputation-based trust management system for P2P networks,”
International Journal of Network Security, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 235-245, May 2008.

Wilkinson S., Boshevski T., Brandoff J. and Buterin V., “Storj a peer-to-peer cloud storage network,” vol. 1,
pp. 1-18, 2014.

Kadhim D.J., Yu X., Jabbar S.Q., Li Y., Luo W., “A New Scheme for QoE Management of Live Video Streaming
in Cloud Environment,” In: Paul M., Hitoshi C., Huang Q. (eds) Image and Video Technology. PSIVT 2017.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10749. Springer, Cham, pp 150-161, 2018.

Mohammed, Ali Abdul Wahhab, and Assad H. Thary Al-Ghrairi, "Differences between Ad Hoc Networks and
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks: A Survey," Journal of Southwest Jiaotong University, vol. 54, no. 4, 2019.

Qi. M, and Yang. Y, “P2P DDoS: challenges and countermeasures,” In 2009 Sixth International Conference on
Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery, IEEE Press, vol. 7, pp. 265-268, Aug. 2009.

B. Pourebrahimi et al., “A survey of peer-to-peer networks,” In Proceedings of the 16th Annual Workshop on
Circuits, Systems and Signal Processing, ProRisc, Citeseer, vol. 2005, 2005.

Jabbar S.Q., Kadhim D.J., Li Y., “Proposed an Adaptive Bitrate Algorithm based on Measuring Bandwidth and
Video Buffer Occupancy for Providing Smoothly Video Streaming. (IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced
Computer Science and Applications, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1-10, 2018.

Stallings W., “Network Security Essentials: applications and standards,” Pearson, Aug. 2016.

Khamees, Hussein Thary, and Ali Abdul Wahhab Mohammed, "Bit Error Rate Evaluation in Atmospheric Blustery
for Slant Path Spread of Super Lorentz Gaussian Beam," Journal of Southwest Jiaotong University, vol. 55, no. 1,
2020.

Rice, D.O., “A Proposal for the Security of Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Networks: a pricing model inspired by the theory
of complex networks,” In 2007 41st Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, IEEE Press,
pp. 812-813, Mar. 2007.

Yu S.C., and Li Y.C., “To Inhibit DDoS Attack for P2P Overlay Based on Level Model,” In 2009 International
Symposium on Computer Network and Multimedia Technology, IEEE Press, Jan 18. 2009, pp. 1-4.

Ali K., Aib I. and Boutaba R., “P2P-AIS: a P2P artificial immune systems architecture for detecting DDoS flooding
attacks,” In 2009 Global Information Infrastructure Symposium, IEEE Press, pp. 1-4, Jun. 2009.

Dasgupta D., Ji Z., and Gonzalez F., “Artificial immune system (AIS) research in the last five years,” In The 2003
Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC’03), IEEE Press, vol. 1, pp. 123-130, Dec. 2003.

Mashimo Y., Yasutomi M., and Shigeno H. “SRJE: Decentralized authentication scheme against Sybil attacks,”
International Conference on Network-Based Information Systems, IEEE Press, pp. 220-225, Aug. 2009.

Lua E.K., Crowcroft J., Pias M., Sharma R. and Lim S., “A survey and comparison of peer-to-peer overlay network
schemes,” IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 7, no. 1-4, pp. 72-93, Apr. 2005.

Analysis of threats and security issues evaluation in mobile P2P networks (Ali Abdulwahhab Mohammed)
