International Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering (J ECE)
Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020, pp. 6531~6540
ISSN: 2088-8708, DOI: 10.1159 1/ijece.v1016.pp653 1-6540 0 6531

An effective identification of crop diseases using faster region
based convolutional neural network and expert systems

P. Chandana!,G. S. Pradeep Ghantasala’*, J. Rethna Virgil Jeny*, Kaushik Sekaran‘*,

Deepika N.°, Yunyoung Nam*, Seifedine Kadry’

'34Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Vignan Institute of Technology and Science, India
*Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Malla Reddy Institute of Technology and Science, India
Pp Pp g g y gy
>Research Scholar, Department of Computer Science and Engineering,

Vignan's Foundation for Science Technology and Research, India

6Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Soonchunhyang University, South Korea
’Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Faculty of Science, Beirut Arab University, Lebanon

Article Info
Article history:

Received Dec 19, 2019
Revised May 21, 2020
Accepted May 31, 2020

ABSTRACT

The majority of research Study is moving towards cognitive computing,
ubiquitous computing, internet of things (loT) which focus on some of
the real time applications like smart cities, smart agriculture, wearable smart
devices. The objective of the research in this paper is to integrate the image
processing strategies to the smart agriculture techniques to help the farmers

to use the latest innovations of technology in order to resolve the issues of

crops like infections or diseases to their crops which may be due to bugs or
Keywords: due to climatic conditions or may be due to soil consistency. As IoT is
playing a crucial role in smart agriculture, the concept of infection
recognition using object recognition the image processing strategy can help
out the farmers greatly without making them to learn much about
loT the technology and also helps them to sort out the issues with respect to crop.
Object recognition In this paper, an attempt of integrating kissan application with expert systems
Smart agriculture and image processing is made in order to help the farmers to have an

immediate solution for the problem identified in a crop.

Cognitive computing
Image processing

Copyright © 2020 Institute of Advanced Engineering and Science.
All rights reserved.

Corresponding Author:

Yunyoung Nam,

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Soonchunhyang University,

Asan 31538, South Korea.

Email: ynam@sch.ac.kr

1. INTRODUCTION

Among various revenue generating sources for the economy of any country, agriculture is a sector
which plays a vital role in the economic development of any country. In other words, we can say that
agriculture is the backbone for economy by providing basic ingredients to the mankind and the raw material
for the industrialization. As it acts as a backbone for the country economy, the advancements of technology
used in agriculture need to be made in order to increase the output which is directly proportional to
the country economy. The advancements in the techniques and technology used for agriculture is represented
with certain names like smart agriculture or digital agriculture or climate-smart Agriculture, and
the strategies followed under this scheme include activities with respect to the actions performed in
the agriculture, which may represent percentage of moisture in soil, predicting the crop yield, and suggesting
the crops basing on the parameters like moisture, durability and strength of the soil.

The idea of the smart agriculture is to help the agriculture industry by guiding actions required to
modify and reorient agricultural systems by supporting the development and _ providing the food security in
spite of ever-changing climate helping the country by increasing the productivity and income. The area of

Journal homepage: http://ijece.iaescore.com/index.php/IJ ECE
6532 O ISSN: 2088-8708

smart agriculture can be considered as a major application area under the research study of Cloud computing,
Big data, IOT applications and various modules of design that can be implemented using IOT with respect to
smart agriculture is shown in Figure 1 and the modules that can be designed with respect to the crop is shown
in Figure 2.

 

Figure 1. Applications with respect to smart Figure 2. Smart agriculture modules
agriculture

Key characteristics of smart agricultures:

- Handle climate change: In contrast with traditional agricultural development, Smart agriculture integrates
climate change systematically into the planning and development of sustainable agricultural systems.

- Combines multiple goals and control trade-offs: Ideally, these systems produce triple outcomes 1.e,
increased productivity, enhanced resilience and reduced emissions but may not achieve all three at once.
When there is a need of implementation, trade-offs need to be made.

- CSA maintains ecosystems services: These systems adopt a landscape approach which builds upon
the principles of sustainable agriculture maintaining the ecosystem.

- CSA has multiple entry points at different levels: These systems can have multiple entry points, ranging
from the development of technologies and practices to the elaboration of climate change models and
scenarios, information technologies, insurance schemes, and supply-value chains.

Expert Systems is the area of Artificial Intelligence, which is a computer system or software design
that provides the decision making capability of a human expert. These systems are designed to solve
the complex problems by reasoning through bodies of knowledge, represented using IF-Then rules instead of
conventional notations of source code. The expert system is divided into subsystems namely inference engine
and knowledge base, in which the inference engines apply the rules to the known facts to obtain new facts by
including debugging abilities, where as the knowledge base systems represents the facts and rules. The model
of an expert systems is shown in Figure 3.

   
  
 

Human Knowledge
Expert Engineer

  

User

ee
Interface —

  
 

User
(May not be an expert)

 

Figure 3. Model representation of an expert system

Int J Elec & Comp Eng, Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020 : 6531 - 6540
Int J Elec & Comp Eng ISSN: 2088-8708 O 6533

2. RELATED WORKS

Tan et al., [1], stated that the research on AI has the tremendous effects on the various fields like
militaries, medicals, chemistry, engineering, management ,manufacturing etc. They also mentioned that
the AI presents the wide scope in the technology development by defining various forms of implementations
like fuzzy logic, neural network, rule-based expert system, frame-based expert system, genetic algorithm, etc.
They presented the statements that AI research and applications is going to replace the human experts with
the latest innovations in the technology.

Bassem et al., [2], proposed an Expert System design which is used to help farmers for diagnosing
watermelon diseases namely Powdery mildew,Downy mildew, Alternaria leaf spot, Anthracnose, Fusarium
wilt and Cucumber mosaic disease. They designed an expert system which presents an information on
watermelon diseases, causes and the treatment of disease using E-clips Expert System language and
evaluated with a group of farmers to identify the performance.

Sabzi et al., [3], discussed about the Precision Agriculture where the goals is to identify and to
remove weeds intelligently, where herbicides can be sprayed only in weeds existing areas by reducing
the dosage of herbicides to avoid harmful effects. They presented a computer vision based expert system for
identifying potato plants and three different kinds of weeds to perform site-specific spraying. They presented
visualization of agriculture through longitude and latitude positioning for identifying the objects using image
processing, they extracted 3459 objects to train and test the classifiers with 126 color features and 60 texture
features from each object. They used two metaheuristic algorithms to optimize the performance of a neural
network classifier: namely, the cultural algorithm, harmony search algorithm for the optimal configuration of
the network and then a statistical method based on linear discriminant analysis is used for the experimental
evaluation.

Bannerjee et al., [4], presented a survey on the applications of artificial intelligence techniques in
agriculture addressing several issues like crop management, soil management, weed management etc, which
leads to severe crop loss along with environmental hazards may be due to excessive use of chemicals. Several
researches have been conducted to address these issues. They presented various contributions of artificial
intelligence related to agriculture covering the domains and domains to provide information on agro-
intelligent systems.

Ravisankar et al., [5], presented an web based expert system design for the identification of insect
/pest management on the crop by diagnosing the problem to minimize the yield losses. The experimentation
is carried out on the tobacco crop. The model designed by them is presented as Agridaksh, using ontology
based methods for the effective identification and management of pests. The knowledge model is designed
for the efficient knowledge acquisition, knowledge retrieval process.

Nipun et al., [6], presented the smart agriculture concept using IOT, using Arduino kit.
They proposed a model with temperature sensors, radar sensors for optimizing water usage and yield and also
adopted smart water management systems with consistent monitoring of weather conditions. The setup also
represents a part of grid which utilizes solar energy to prevent battery loss with a miniature solar farm.
They adopted machine learning algorithms and IOT to handle the problems related to water and energy.

Sarker et al., [7] adopted CNN models from machine to handle complex image detection problems.
They used a region-based, fully convolutional network, for processing fast and accurate object detection on
the crops. They stated that the deep residual networks (ResNets) can process the training process faster and
attain high accuracy than traditional conventional neural networks. They used deep residual network for
handling the over-fitting problem as well as data augmentation with ResNet to identify the weeds in the crop.

Hawashin et al., [8], presented the importance of smart agriculture and provided the ideology for
managing the water resource management in the agriculture. They adapted the [Ot with the vision of
multimedia i.e, Internet of multimedia things (IoMT) to optimize the irrigation process with the help of
multimedia sensors. They included image processing and machine learning strategies along with IOT to
perform the optimized irrigation process.

Fiehn et al., [9], discussed the role of Smart farming as an economic way of agriculture adopting
the latest technologies like IOT allowing more number of choices in designing the optimal solution for
various challenges. They designed the strategical solution using machine learning to handle the water supply
irrespective of climate changes. They used RF, Solar energy with various sensors and actuators to perform
the monitoring process. Later they used Convolutional neural network for performing the data flow control.
Jha, et al., [10, 11], presented the survey on various problems that will arise for a crop in agriculture by
choosing the grape crop. They also discussed about various challenges that are recognized in the crop
management and various machine learning strategies that can be applied for effective or smart agriculture
application. They gave the ideology of using multiple strategies to invoke solutions for handling different
forms of challenges.

An effective identification of crop diseases using faster region based convolutional neural ... (P. Chandana)
6534. O ISSN: 2088-8708

3. ARCHITECTURE
The architecture of the proposed work is presented in Figure 4. The Architecture can be explained in

4 stages namely acquisition, validation, query processing and presentation.

a. Acquisition: This stage is considered for obtaining the crop images from various sources, which can be
either captured or maintained as a dataset by the administrator or the farmer who captures the image of
effected area of the crop using capturing devices. The images captured from various sources are identified
with the infected areas and annotated with the information of infection and maintained as a dataset using
object recognition [12] techniques. If the image is a test image, then the annotations are generated and
verified across the set of training images.

b. Validation: The test image obtained from the farmer is verified across the set of images in the training
dataset along with the annotations, if it finds similar annotations along with the images then
the corresponding class of infections are selected in the next phase, otherwise no information is provided
and fed again for the registration of new image in the dataset.

c. Query Processing: This stage deals with presenting the set of questions related to the symptoms identified
on the crop, and applying IF-THEN/Decision Rules on them provides the input of selecting the class of
infections and in the next stage detailed information about the infection obtained and reasons for
occurrence and preventive measures is provided.

d. Presentation: The information about the infection occurred and reasons of such infections and necessary
preventive measures are displayed to the farmer.

Image
Acquisition Training

Cro Images
P Dataset .
images Register
Image

Administrator

Symptoms
Questionnaire

Extract bounding
Capture boxes and generate
| Image | Annotations

Farmer Measures

IF -THEN Rules,’
Description Logic

Infection
information and

 

Figure 4. Architecture of the proposed system

4. RESEARCH METHOD

The methodology used in proposed work collaborates two areas of research study namely image
processing, expert systems. In this work, we adopt the object recognition methods for the effective
identification of infections on the image, then it is annotated with the terminologies of infections identified.
These annotations play a major role in classifying the type of infections obtained which may be due to weeds
or due to climatic conditions and soil quality. The methodology can be classified into two strategies namely,
Rot Identification and disease predictor. The methodology in the paper is evaluated and carried out on
the maize crop which contains several forms of infections and diseases which may be due to soil consistency,
climatic conditions, weeds and bugs.

4.1. Rot identification

The term rot represents the infections obtained for the plant which may be occurred due to bugs or
weeds and the climatic conditions, soil quality. Process of Rot identification [13, 14] deals with
the identification of infected area on the leaf or plant due to any of the aforementioned cases. The process of

Int J Elec & Comp Eng, Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020 : 6531 - 6540
Int J Elec & Comp Eng ISSN: 2088-8708 O 6535

identification adapts the object recognition strategy of image processing and uses machine learning
techniques [15, 16] to effectively identify the affected areas. In this approach, the faster Region-based
Convolutional neural network (R-CNN) is used to process the detection phase faster and store the annotations
for the processed image as a text file. The concept of faster RCNN is given in the preceding sections.

4.2. Convolutional neural networks (CNN)

The Idea of including CNN is to train the data that is the images of various types of diseases in
the crop such as infections and other possible rots. In The convolutional neural networks each layer will be
considered for the training the data. The CNN includes main layers namely convolutional neural networks
layer, Max-pooling layer and soft-max layer for performing effective classification of the dataset. Each layers
includes set of calculations to perform the mapping of larger datasets with the given input test set.

4.3. Convolutional layer
The objective of the convolution layer is to map the upper level features to the current layer using
convolution operation. It can be expressed as shown in (1).

Wa = We *XChy+ Ba (1)
pEFg

where n means the nth layer, Cpq represents the convolutional kernel, Bq represents the bias, and Fq
represents the feature maps.

4.4. Max-pooling layer

In this layer, the sampling is performed by reducing the size of feature maps to achieve the spatial
mapping for the faster and better performance. Also, the feature map at each layer is passed on to the next
consecutive layer using the following max function in order to maintaining as a pool as given in (2).

MPgq = Max Lp
p € PRq (2)

where, PRq denotes pooling region in the layer and q denotes in feature map and also interestingly,
the pooling layer of this could be represented by Lp, and p represents the index of every element in the pool
and MP denotes the pooled feature maps.

The processing of images in the proposed work requires faster and efficient mechanism for training
and providing the outputs with respect to farmer queries. Therefore, the advanced convolutional network
for processing images namely, region based convolutional network has been included. The extension of
the RCCN has been discussed below.

4.5. Soft-max layer

Soft max layer is used to perform classification with respect to dataset availability. It is intended to
create the training dataset by applying the cost function 0. Also, for each test set, it verifies the training
dataset for the appropriate match. If the Loss value obtained is less, then with respect to cost function
the value could be changed for the appropriate match. If this default case fails, then it is a mismatch.
This scenario has been explained through the regression model of the soft max layer as represented in (3).

eq
X wP
p (h? = q| w?; 6) = ——.-—— (3)

6
yee e "X wPa

where h and w represent the pixel positions of the images in the training set, 8 represents the cost function
and finally T represents training set.

4.6. Faster RCNN

It is the model, obtained using the selective search on the bounding boxes (regions) identified using
region based convolutional network [17] by applying deep models for object detection. In this method,
the generation of region proposal and object detection are performed using same convolutional networks [18]
which leads to faster object detection. The entire image is passed to ConvNet for generating region of
interests rather than extracted regions from the image. It uses a single model which extracts the features from
the regions, and classifies them into different classes by returning the bounding boxes. It adapts region

An effective identification of crop diseases using faster region based convolutional neural ... (P. Chandana)
6536 O ISSN: 2088-8708

proposal network (RPN) rather than selective search approach. The feature maps from the input image are

extracted using ConvNet and the maps are passed through the RPN for returning the object proposals,

and these maps are finally classified and the bounding boxes are predicted. The transformation of mapping is

shown in Figure 5.

The Algorithm for the Faster RCNN [19] can be illustrated as follows:

- The input image is passed to the ConvNet and extracts the feature maps of the image.

- The object proposals are obtained on these feature maps by applying Region Proposal Network (RPN)
using a sliding window mechanism on the feature maps.

- For each location, k, (k=9) anchor boxes are used in a scales of 128,256,512 and aspect ratios of 1:1, 1:2
and 2:1 sizes by applying ROI pooling layer to generate all the proposals to uniform size.

- A layers named cls and reg layers were used to identify the object for the k boxes and to generate the box
coordinates with a uniform width and height with a scores of 2k and 4k and then the WXH feature map is
generating WHk anchors in total at the RPN layer, see Figure 6.

- Finally, these proposals are passed to a fully connected layer in order to classify and predict the bounding
boxes in the image.

classifier

   
   
 

Rol pooling

moves

Region Proposal Network

feature maps

conv layers a

Figure 5. Transformation of mapping and classification

4k coordinates = k anchor boxes

cls layer ‘ f reg layer

256-d
t intermediate layer

 

 

sliding window

conv feature map

Figure 6. The output of RPN

Int J Elec & Comp Eng, Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020 : 6531 - 6540
Int J Elec & Comp Eng ISSN: 2088-8708 O 6537

4.7. Disease predictor engine

After identifying the classification of rots in the rot identification phase, the set of questionnaires is
generated with the basic symptoms of the identified rot, the decision rule logic is followed by extracting
the basic ontologies from the set of symptoms generated for the type of rots. The ontologies with highest
precedence of words will be considered as an important symptoms and presented to the farmer in the form of
questionnaire consisting true or false/ yes or no logic using the IF-THEN principle., if the set of answers are
determined as true, then the information about the symptom is presented to farmer. The text to voice
generation application can also be integrated to support the kissan application. The IOT [20] operations can
be incorporated to provide the information via SMS or a phone call.

5. RESULTS

The experimentation is carried out on the maize crop which has a greater number of classifications
of infections and diseases [21-25] due to bacteria, fungus, pests, and climatic conditions. The results of rot
identification using faster regional convolutional neural network (R-CNN) are shown in Figure 7(a) and 7(b),
the Figure 7(a) presents the infected areas on the leaves of a maize crop and Figure 7(b) presents the regions
of identifications made using bounding boxes. The results of the disease predictor are shown in Figures 8-10,
the task of disease predictor is to provide the information about the infection classified under Rot
identification phase in order the help the farmer to know the details about the infection occurred along with
the reasons of its occurrence.

 

(b)

Figure 7. Results of rot identification, (a) Set of infections on the leaves of a maize crop,
(b) Rots identified on the leaves of a maize crop

An effective identification of crop diseases using faster region based convolutional neural ... (P. Chandana)
6538 O ISSN: 2088-8708

 

Figure 8. Set of infections with respect to the classification

Did you observe the following Problems with respect to the query vou selected.

Q1. Did you notice soi! line turning brown on the leaves *Yes No
Q2. Did you notice foul odor on the leaves * Yes “No
Q3. Did you notice mushy appearance on the leaves *Yes No
Q4, Did you notice slimy on the leaves *Yes “No
QS. Did you notice tissue on the leaves *" Yes No
Q6,. Did you notice water on the leaves * Yes “No
Q7. Did you notice soft on the leaves * Yes “No

Q8. Did you notice plants suddenly beginning on the leaves ™ Yes — No

Q9. Did you notice internodes on the leaves *"Yes “No

Figure 9. Set of questionnaires generated for the selected problem or identified infection after classification

 

The bacteria u r looking for ts Bacterial stalk rot

Symptoms: Plants suddenly beginning to lodge (bend to le along the ground) midway through season; one or more internodes
above soll line turning brown, water-soaked, soft and slimy; tissue has foul odor and mushy appearance;

Cause: Bacterium

Reasons: Oisease ts most commonly found in plantations which have overhead irrigation systems or in areas with high rainfall;
disease emergence is favored by high temperatures and high humidity.

Figure 10. The information about the selected infection is presented to the farmer

Int J Elec & Comp Eng, Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020 : 6531 - 6540
Int J Elec & Comp Eng ISSN: 2088-8708 O 6539

6. COMPARATIVE STUDY

The Proposed methodology is experimented on the dataset of maize crop and compared with other
approaches of object detection algorithms namely Region based Convolutional Neural network(R-CNN),
Fast R-CNN, Spatial Pyramid Pooling Network (SPP-Net) algorithms. The comparative analysis is made for
analyzing the performance of algorithms in terms of speed and Accuracy. Table 1 presents the speed of
recognizing the objects like rots and weeds in the crop by including and excluding the region proposals in
terms of Test-Time Speed. The Graphical analysis of the performance is presented in Figure 11, with
the analysis of optimal speed in recognizing objects on the crop.

Table 1. The test time speed analysis of the algorithms with and without regions

Algorithm Test-Time Speed (in Secs)
Including Regions Excluding Regions
R-CNN 20 18
SPP-Net 45 2.5
Fast R-CNN 2.5 0.35
Faster R-CNN 0.32 0.2

Chart Title

® Including Regions @ Excluding Regions

 

SPP-Net Fast R-CNN Faster R-CNN

 

Figure 11. Test time speed analysis of algorithms

7. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE

The proposed work focus on integrating the machine learning strategies to the expert system to
provide the exclusive information to the farmer by helping them with the information about the infections
occurred to their crops. The experimentation in the proposed work is carried out on the maize crop as it
contains the various classifications of diseases which might be due to climatic conditions, fungal infections
etc. The process simplifies the task of knowing the details about the infections occurred by simply uploading
the image of the infection, which is fed to the image processing strategy using Machine Learning for
identifying the rots using Faster R-CNN and further classifies the infection and presented to the disease
predictor engine and then the set of questionnaire is generated to the farmer on the type of infection plotted
asking for the answers in the form of Yes/No, the set of yes’s presents the information about the infection
occurred along with the reason of occurrence and preventive measures. The methodology of Faster R-CNN
presents the efficiency in terms of performance by operating within a fraction of 0.2 secs. The work can be
extended by employing the RGB configuration in the bounding box to predict the object more accurately
with respect to the color of the surface of a plant and leaf color and integrate sms and call gateway API’s,
text to voice translation systems which would help in more precise way to the farmer by supporting
illiterate farmers providing the precautions and preventive measures in the form of voice commands using
IOT operations.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the Soonchunhyang University Research Fund.

An effective identification of crop diseases using faster region based convolutional neural ... (P. Chandana)
6540 O ISSN: 2088-8708

REFERENCES

[1] C.F. Tan, et al., “The application of expert system: A review of research and applications,” ARPN Journal of
Engineering and Applied Sciences, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 2448-2453, 2016.

[2] B.S.A. Nasser and S. S.A. Naser, “Cognitive System for Helping Farmers in Diagnosing Watermelon Diseases,”
International Journal of Academic Information Systems Research (IJ AISR), vol. 2, no. 7, pp. 1-7, 2018.

[3] S. Sabzi, et al., “A fast and accurate expert system for weed identification in potato crops using metaheuristic
algorithms,” Computers in Industry, vol. 98, pp. 80-89, 2018.

[4] G. Bannerjee, et al., “Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture: A Literature Survey,” International Journal of Scientific
Research in Computer Science Applications and Management Studies, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1-6, 2018.

[5] H. Ravisankar, et al., “Web based expert system for identification and management of insect pests of tobacco,”
Journal of Entomology and Zoology Studies, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 803-807, 2019.

[6] N. Katyal and B. J. Pandian, “A Comparative Study of Conventional and Smart Farming,” in Emerging
Technologies for Agriculture and Environment, pp. 1-8, 2020.

[7] M. I. Sarker and H. Kim, “Farm land weed detection with region-based deep convolutional neural networks,”
ICROS 2017 32nd Control Robot System Society Conference, 2019.

[8] S. AlZu’bi, et al., “An efficient employment of internet of multimedia things in smart and future agriculture,”
Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 78, pp. 29581-29605, 2019.

[9] H.B. Fiehn, et al., “Smart agriculture system based on deep learning,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Smart Digital Environment, pp. 158-165, 2018.

[10] K. Jha, et al., “A comprehensive review on automation in agriculture using artificial intelligence,” Artificial
Intelligence in Agriculture, vol. 2, pp. 1-12, 2019.

[11] S.A. Alvi, et al., “Internet of multimedia things: Vision and challenges,’ Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 33, pp. 87-111,
2015.

[12] X. Cao, et al., “Region based CNN for foreign object debris detection on airfield pavement,” Sensors, vol. 18,
no. 3, p. 737, 2018.

[13] S. Jin, et al., “Deep learning: individual maize segmentation from terrestrial lidar data using faster R-CNN and
regional growth algorithms,” Frontiers in plant science, vol. 9, p. 866, 2018.

[14] P. Yadav and M. Kumari, “Object Recognition Using Deep Learning in IoT Applications,” in Proceedings of 3rd
International Conference on Internet of Things and Connected Technologies (ICIoTCT), 2018.

[15] C. Lopez-Castafio, et al., “Computer vision and the internet of things ecosystem in the connected home,” in
International Symposium on Distributed Computing and Artificial Intelligence, pp. 213-220, 2018.

[16] M. F. Rutolo, et al., “The use of an electronic nose to detect early signs of soft-rot infection in potatoes,”
Biosystems engineering, vol. 167, pp. 137-143, 2018.

[17] U. Shruthi, et al., “A Review on Machine Learning Classification Techniques for Plant Disease Detection,” in 2019
5th International Conference on Advanced Computing & Communication Systems (ICACCS), pp. 281-284, 2019.

[18] J. Gao, et al., “Recognising weeds in a maize crop using a random forest machine-learning algorithm and near-
infrared snapshot mosaic hyperspectral imagery,” Biosystems Engineering, vol. 170, pp. 39-50, 2018.

[19] K.G. Liakos, et al., “Machine learning in agriculture: A review,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 8, p. 2674-2702, 2018.

[20] K. Sekaran, et al., “Deep learning convolutional neural network (CNN) With Gaussian mixture model for
predicting pancreatic cancer,” Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 79, pp. 10233-10247, 2020.

[21] M.A. Hussein and A. H. Abbas, “Plant Leaf Disease Detection Using Support Vector Machine,” Al-Mustansiriyah
Journal of Science, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 105-110, 2019.

[22] K. Sekaran, et al., “Smart agriculture management system using internet of things,’ TELKOMNIKA
Telecommunication Computing Electronics and Control, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1275-1284, 2020.

[23] K. Sekaran, et al., “Design of optimal search engine using text summarization through artificial
intelligence techniques,” TELKOMNIKA Telecommunication Computing Electronics and Control, vol. 18, no. 3,
pp. 1268-1274, 2020.

[24] B. Vijayalaxmi, et al., “Implementation of face and eye detection on DM6437 board using simulink model,”
Bulletin of Electrical Engineering and Informatics (BEEI), vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 785-791, 2020.

[25] B. Vijayalaxmi, et al., “Image processing-based eye detection methods a theoretical review,” Bulletin of Electrical
Engineering and Informatics (BEED), vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1189-1197, 2020.

Int J Elec & Comp Eng, Vol. 10, No. 6, December 2020 : 6531 - 6540
