Artificial Intelligence and Law (2020) 28:415-439
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506-020-09260-6

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

m)

Check for
updates

Explainable Al under contract and tort law: legal incentives
and technical challenges

Philipp Hacker' - Ralf Krestel? - Stefan Grundmann! - Felix Naumann?

Published online: 19 January 2020
© The Author(s) 2020

Abstract

This paper shows that the law, in subtle ways, may set hitherto unrecognized incen-
tives for the adoption of explainable machine learning applications. In doing so, we
make two novel contributions. First, on the legal side, we show that to avoid liability,
professional actors, such as doctors and managers, may soon be legally compelled to
use explainable ML models. We argue that the importance of explainability reaches
far beyond data protection law, and crucially influences questions of contractual and
tort liability for the use of ML models. To this effect, we conduct two legal case
studies, in medical and corporate merger applications of ML. As a second contri-
bution, we discuss the (legally required) trade-off between accuracy and explain-
ability and demonstrate the effect in a technical case study in the context of spam
classification.

Keywords Explainability - Explainable AI - Interpretable machine learning -
Contract law - Tort law - Explainability-accuracy trade-off - Medical malpractice -
Corporate takeovers

b<] Philipp Hacker
philipp.hacker @rewi.hu-berlin.de

Ralf Krestel
ralf.krestel @hpi.uni-potsdam.de

Stefan Grundmann
stefan.grundmann @rewi.hu-berlin.de

Felix Naumann
felix.naumann @hpi.uni-potsdam.de
Law Department, Humboldt University of Berlin, Unter den Linden 6, 10099 Berlin, Germany

2 Hasso Plattner Institute, University of Potsdam, Prof.-Dr.-Helmert-Str. 2-3, 14482 Potsdam,
Germany

Q) Springer
416 P. Hacker et al.

1 Aland the law

Machine learning is the most prominent and economically relevant instantiation
of artificial intelligence techniques (Royal Society 2017). While the potential of
machine learning for economic decision-making contexts, from lending decisions
to employment candidate selection, has long been recognized and implemented in
the digital economy (Witten et al. 2016; Cowgill 2017), algorithmic models are
increasingly emerging as the subject of an intense policy debate surrounding the
legality of, and liability for, advanced machine learning applications (Reed et al.
2016; Calo 2016; Selbst 2019).

In this debate, the problem of explainability of decisions reached with the help
of machine learning tools has assumed a central role at the intersection of artifi-
cial intelligence and the law. Today, most of this debate is focused, on the legal
side, on data protection law (Wachter et al. 2017; Selbst and Powles 2017; Doshi-
Velez 2017; Goodman and Flaxman 2016; Malgier1 and Comandé 2017; Wis-
chmeyer 2018). An intense scholarly debate has erupted over whether the General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) includes a right to an explanation of auto-
mated decisions. In this paper, we seek to broaden the scope of this debate along
two dimensions. First, we aim to show that explainability is an important legal
category not only in data protection law, but also in contract and tort law. With
legal requirements under the GDPR being largely unclear at the moment, it seems
fruitful to inquire into the role of explainability in other legal areas. In fact, as we
argue, contract and tort law, not data protection law, may eventually impose legal
requirements to use explainable machine learning models. An upshot of this dis-
cussion is that the trade-off between explainability and accuracy, much discussed
in the technical literature (Mori and Uchihira 2018; Rudin 2019), sits at the heart
of contract and tort liability for the use of AI systems.

Second, we empirically investigate that trade-off in an experiment on spam
classification to show that the precise calibration of the trade-off crucially turns
on the choice of the machine learning model, and the task it is employed for.
This, in turn, has repercussions for the legal analysis concerning liability.

This paper therefore aims to show that it would be a mistake to assume a fac-
ile dichotomy of technology as an enabling and the law as a limiting factor for
the deployment of machine learning technology in economic sectors. Rather, as
we aim to highlight, artificial intelligence and the law are interwoven and, often,
mutually reinforcing: while it is true that the law does set certain limits on the
use of artificial intelligence, it also, and often in the same context, may in fact
require the use of explainable machine learned models for economic agents to
fulfill their duties of care. For example, to avoid liability for medical malprac-
tice, doctors may soon have to rely on machine learning technology if a model
can diagnose a disease (statistically) better than any human eye or brain could;
similarly, companies may be obliged to incorporate machine learned models into
their complex risk assessment strategies, if they are superior to traditional tools,
in order to fulfill regulatory requirements for effective risk management. Machine
learning research, in turn, can benefit from such legal requirements not only by

Q) Springer
Explainable Al under contract and tort law: legal incentives... 417

increasing exposure of models to different situational contexts (providing addi-
tional opportunities for learning), but also by receiving incentives for the devel-
opment of novel types of algorithms, such as explainable AI and user-friendly
interfaces. Allowing this type of engagement between the user and the model will
be crucial for human users, and society at large, to develop the trust in AI neces-
sary for large-scale application and adoption (Lipton 2018; Ribeiro et al. 2016).
The remainder of this article is structured as follows: In Sect. 2, we introduce the
discussion surrounding explainability in AI and the law. Section 3 is dedicated to
two distinct case studies from the perspective of law on medical and corporate appli-
cations of AI. Section 4 takes the perspective of computer science discussing the
trade-off between explainability and accuracy. Finally, Sect. 5 concludes the article.

2 Explainability in Al and the law

Developers of machine learning applications routinely have to make a choice
between different types of models to optimize a task. Such types range from simple
decision trees all the way to deep neural networks. To meet a regulatory burden, or
to avert liability, decision makers have to choose a model that works well in the con-
text at hand. To this extent, the law is agnostic as to the underlying model.

However, in recent years, explainability has emerged as a key factor informing
model choice both from a technical and from a legal point of view. In technical
terms, as we show in greater detail in Sect. 4, different models vary with respect
to their degree of explainability. While there is no uniformly accepted definition
of explainability in machine learning, models can roughly be grouped into those
that are interpretable ex ante and those that can be explained only ex post (Lipton
2018; Rudin 2019). Linear regression models, for example, are typically interpret-
able ex ante as the regression coefficients provide an understanding of the respective
weights of the features used to make a prediction (Lapuschkin et al. 2019). Deep
neural networks, on the other hand, are typically so complex that specific weights
cannot be determined for individual features in a global manner, 1.e., for all possible
predictions (Lapuschkin et al. 2019; Lipton 2018; Rudin 2019). However, a number
of studies have shown that it is often possible to identify ex post the features (input
variables) that are responsible for a specific output (Samek et al. 2017; Montavon
et al. 2017; Bach et al. 2015; Lapuschkin et al. 2019; Ribeiro et al. 2016).

In legal terms, explainability has almost uniquely been discussed as a possible
requirement under data protection law (see refs in Sect. |). Particularly concern-
ing the GDPR, scholars are divided over whether the regulation contains a right
to explanation. The debate has focused on two provisions. Art. 22(3) GDPR holds
that, in certain cases of automated processing, “the data controller shall imple-
ment suitable measures to safeguard the data subject’s rights and freedoms and
legitimate interests, at least the right to obtain human intervention on the part of
the controller, to express his or her point of view and to contest the decision’.
Recital 71 of the GDPR, in discussing Art. 22(3) GDPR, famously states that
the safeguards should, inter alia, include “the right [...] to obtain an explanation
of the decision reached after such assessment”. Since the right to explanation

Q) Springer
418 P. Hacker et al.

is contained only in the (non-binding) recital, and not in the binding text of
Art. 22(3) GDPR, most scholars agree that a right to an explanation of individual
decisions, which could include global or local explanations, does not follow from
Art. 22(3) GDPR (Wachter et al. 2017; Goodman and Flaxman 2017; Selbst and
Powles 2017; Wischmeyer 2018).

This is not the end of the story for EU data protection law, however. Art. 15(1)
(h) GDPR stipulates that, in the case of automated processing in the sense of
Art. 22(1) GDPR, the controller must provide “meaningful information about the
logic involved’. Here, scholars are deeply divided over the implications of this pro-
vision. Some argue that it only refers to the general structure and architecture of
the processing model, but that explanations about individual decisions or concrete
weights and features of the model need not be provided (Wachter et al. 2017; Mal-
gierl and Comandé 2017; Party 2017). Others suggest that information can only be
meaningful if it helps the data subject to exercise her rights under Art. 22(1) and (3)
GDPR, which includes the right to contestation of the decision. Therefore, if spe-
cific explanations of the decision, including the weights and factors used to reach it,
are necessary to check the accuracy of the protection and to potentially challenge its
correctness, such information needs to be provided (Selbst and Powles 2017). While
this interpretation indeed affords the advantage of integrating Art. 15(1)(h) into the
purpose of Art. 22 GDPR, to which it explicitly refers, scholarly consensus is far
from emerging and the question will likely have to be settled by the Court of Justice
of the European Union. Furthermore, the entire provision hinges on the existence of
automated processing in the sense of Art. 22(1) GDPR. However, for this to apply,
the decision must be “based solely on automated processing”. Hence, on the face
of it, any kind of human intervention in the decision exempts the controller from
the constraints of Art. 22 and Art. 15(1)(h) GDPR (Party 2017; Selbst and Powles
2017; Wachter et al. 2017). Therefore, explainability faces, at best, a highly uncer-
tain future under the GDPR.

This is precisely why this article turns to contract and tort law to discuss the rela-
tionship between explainability and liability in these areas. In these domains, there
are two ways in which the law does affect the adoption of machine learning models
in practice. First, the question arises if certain actors indeed have to use ML models,
instead of or at least complementing human decision making, to avoid liability if the
model consistently outperforms humans (see below, under Sects. 3.1 and 3.2). We
shall investigate this matter in two case studies: liability of medical doctors for fail-
ing to use ML diagnostics; and liability for corporate managers for failing to use ML
company valuation tools in Mergers and Acquisitions (M&A). As the case studies
show, the degree to which the law compels the adoption of ML tools is, inter alia,
a function of their explainability. Second, liability for the selection of the precise
machine learning model crucially hinges on the relationship between explainability
and accuracy (or other performance metrics). However, as we show in Sect. 4, in
state-of-the-art models explainability and performance in terms of predication accu-
racy are often proportionally inverse: easily explainable models may perform poorly,
while the currently best performing models are so highly complex that even expert
developers can explain neither intuitively nor technically how the good results
come about. Since this trade-off is also at the heart of questions of contract and

Q) Springer
Explainable Al under contract and tort law: legal incentives... 419

tort liability, the technical explainability-accuracy trade-off replicates in the legal
domain. We now turn to the case studies to elaborate these points further.

3 Case studies

Our two case studies, on medical diagnostics/malpractice and on corporate valu-
ation/the business judgment rule, analyze recent advances in ML prediction tools
from a legal point of view. Importantly, they go beyond the current discussion
around the data protection requirements of explainability to show that explainabil-
ity is a crucial, but overlooked, category for the assessment of contractual and tort
liability concerning the use of AI tools. We follow up in Sect. 4 on explainability
proper, additionally implementing an exemplary spam classification, to discuss the
trade-off between accuracy and explainability from both a technical and a legal
perspective.

3.1 Medical diagnostics

Medical diagnostics is a field where technology and the law patently interconnect.
The medical standard of care defines contractual and tort liability for medical mal-
practice. However, this standard is itself shaped by state-of-the-art technology. If
doctors fail to use novel, ML-driven methods, which are required by the applicable
standard of care, liability potentially looms large. Conversely, if they apply models
that result in erroneous predictions, they are equally threatened by liability. Impor-
tantly, both questions are intimately connected to explainability, as we argue below.

3.1.1 The rise of ML diagnostics

Indeed, ML models using a variety of techniques are increasingly entering the
field of medical diagnostics and treatment [overview in Topol (2019)]. For exam-
ple, researchers developed a model, based on reinforcement learning, for the diag-
nosis and optimal treatment of patients with sepsis in intensive care. The model,
termed “AI clinician’, analyzes the patient’s state and selects appropriate medication
doses (Komorowski et al. 2018). On average, the AI clinician outperformed human
intensive care experts. In a large validation data set, different from the training data
set, patients’ survival rate was highest when the actual doses administered by human
clinicians matched the AI clinician’s predictions.In another recent study, a deep
neural network was trained to detect Alzheimer disease based on brain scans (Ding
2018). Not only did the network outperform human analysts by an important margin;
it also detected the disease an average 75 months before the final clinical diagnosis.
This makes particularly effective early treatment medication available to patients
much earlier. Supra-human performance could also be established in the detection
of retinal diseases (De Fauw 2018) and in heart attack prediction (Weng et al. 2017).

ML is increasingly used in cancer diagnosis and treatment, too (Kourou et al.
2015). This is often due to advances in pattern recognition in images, a field in

Q) Springer
420 P. Hacker et al.

which deep neural networks perform particularly well. Researchers trained a con-
volutional neural network (CNN) to identify skin cancer on the basis of images of
skin lesions (Esteva et al. 2017). The CNN matched the performance of 21 board-
certified dermatologists in the classification of two varieties of skin cancer (the
most common and the deadliest version of skin cancer). Similarly, a Chinese ML
was reported to have beaten a team of 15 experienced doctors in brain tumor rec-
ognition (Press 2018). However, not all that glitters is gold: IBM’s Watson had,
according to news reports, difficulties in correctly identifying cancer patients (Ross
and Swetlitz 2018), and hospitals were reported to cut back collaborations with
IBM (Jaklevic 2017). This shows that rigorous field validation is necessary before
ML models can be safely used in medical contexts—an issue that informs our analy-
sis of the legal prerequisites for the adoption of such models.

3.1.2 Legal liability

As the previous section has shown, predictions used by medical AI models are not,
of course, fully accurate in every case. Hence, we shall ask what factors determine
whether such a potentially erroneous model may be used by a medical doctor with-
out incurring liability. Furthermore, with ML technology approaching, and in some
cases even surpassing, human capacities in medical diagnostics, the question arises
whether the failure to use such models may constitute medical malpractice. The rel-
evant legal provisions under contract and tort law differ from country to country. We
offer a legal analysis in which we generally refer to German and US law in particu-
lar; nevertheless, general normative guidelines can be formulated.

Adoption For the sake of simplicity, we assume that all formal requirements for
the use of the ML model in medical contexts are met. In April 2018, for example,
the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved IDxDR, an ML tool for
the detection of diabetes-related eye disorders (US Food and Drug Administration
2018). While liability for the adoption of new medical technology is an obvious con-
cern for medical malpractice law (Katzenmeier 2006; Greenberg 2009), the issue
has, to our knowledge, not been discussed with an explicit focus on explainability
of ML models. The related but different question whether the avoidance of legal
liability compels the adoption of such a model has rarely been discussed in liter-
ature (Froomkin 2018; Greenberg 2009) and, to our knowledge, not at all by the
courts. The answer to both questions crucially depends on whether it is considered
negligent, under contractual and tort liability, (not) to use ML models during the
treatment process. This, in turn, is determined by the appropriate medical standard
of care.

Generally speaking, healthcare providers, such as hospitals or doctor’s practices,
cannot be required to always purchase and use the very best products on the mar-
ket. For example, when a new, more precise version of an x-ray machine becomes
available, it would be ruinous for healthcare providers to be compelled to always
immediately buy such new equipment. Therefore, they must be allowed to rely on
their existing methods and products as long as these practices guarantee a satisfac-
tory level of diagnostic accuracy, 1.e., as long as they fall within the “state of the
art” (Hart 2000). However, as new and empirically better products become available,

Q) Springer
Explainable Al under contract and tort law: legal incentives... 421

the minimum threshold of acceptable accuracy moves upward. Otherwise, medical
progress could not enter negligence norms. Hence, the content of the medical stand-
ard, whose fulfilment excludes negligence, is informed not only by experience and
professional acceptance, but also (and in an increasingly dominant way) by empiri-
cal evidence (Hart 2000; Froomkin 2018).

Importantly, therefore, the acceptable level of accuracy could change with the
introduction of new, more precise, ML driven models. Three criteria, we argue,
should be met for this to be the case. First, the use of the model must not, in itself,
lead to medical malpractice liability. This criterion, therefore, addresses our first
question concerning liability for the positive use of ML technology in medicine. To
rely on the model, there must be a significant difference between the performance
of the model and human-only decision making in its absence. This difference must
be shown consistently in a number of independent studies and be validated in real-
world clinical settings—which is often lacking at the moment (Topol 2019). The
superiority of the model cannot be measured only in terms of its accuracy (1.e., the
ratio of correct over all predictions); rather, other performance metrics, such as sen-
sitivity (a measure of false negatives)! or specificity (a measure of false positives),”
also need to be considered. Depending on the specific area, a low false positive or
false negative rate may be equally desirable, or even more important, than superior
accuracy (Froomkin 2018; Topol 2019; Caruana 2015). For example, false nega-
tives in tumor detection will mean that the cancer can grow untreated—dquite likely
the worst medial outcome. The deep learning model for detecting Alzheimer dis-
ease, for example, did have both higher specificity and sensitivity (and hence higher
accuracy) than human radiologists (Ding 2018). The superiority of the novel method
must, in addition, be plausible for the concrete case at hand to be legitimate in that
instance. Under German law, for example, new medical methods meet the standard
of care if the marginal advantages vis-a-vis conventional methods outweigh the dis-
advantages for an individual patient (Katzenmeier 2006); the same holds true for US
law (Greenberg 2009).

This has important implications for the choice between an explainable and a
non-explainable model: the non-explainable model may be implemented only
if the marginal benefits of its use (improved accuracy) outweigh the marginal
costs. This depends on whether the lack of explainability entails significant
risks for patients, such as risks of undetected false negative treatment decisions.
As Ribeiro et al. (2016) rightly argue, explainability 1s crucial for medical profes-
sionals to assess whether a prediction is made based on plausible factors or not.
The use of an explainable model facilitates the detection of false positives and
false negative classifications, because it provides medical doctors with reasons
for the predictions, which can be critically discussed (Lapuschkin et al. 2019;
Lipton 2018) (see, in more detail, the next section). However, this does not imply

' Sensitivity is defined as the ratio of true positives over all positives, ie., over the sum of true positives
and false negatives. Sensitivity is also called recall in ML contexts.

? Specificity is defined as the ratio of true negatives over all negatives, i.e., over the sum of true nega-
tives and false positives.

Q) Springer
422 P. Hacker et al.

that explainable models should always be chosen over non-explainable models.
Clearly, if an explainable model performs equally well as a non-explainable one,
the former must be chosen [for examples, see Rudin (2019) and Rudin and Ustun
(2018)]. But, if explainability reduces accuracy—which need not necessarily
be the case, see Rudin (2019) and below, Sect. 4—the choice of an explainable
model will lead to some inaccurate decisions that would have been accurately
taken under a non-explainable model with superior accuracy. Therefore, in these
cases, doctors must diligently weigh the respective marginal costs and benefits of
the models. In some situations, it may be possible, given general medical knowl-
edge, to detect false predictions even without having access to the factors the
model uses. In this case, the standard of care simply dictates that the model with
significantly superior accuracy should be chosen. If, however, the detection of
false predictions, particularly of false negatives, requires or is significantly facili-
tated by an explanation of the algorithmic model, the standard of care will neces-
sitate the choice of the explainable model. Arguably, this will often be the case:
it seems difficult to evaluate the model predictions in the field without access to
the underlying factors used, precisely because it will often be impossible to say
whether a divergence from traditional medical wisdom is due to a failure of the
model or to its superior diagnostic qualities.

Hence, general contract and tort law significantly constrains the use of non-
explainable ML models—arguably, in more important ways than data protection
law. Only if the balancing condition (between the respective costs and benefits of
accuracy and explainability) is met, the use of the model should be deemed gener-
ally legitimate (but not yet obligatory).

Second, for the standard of care to be adjusted upward, and hence the use of a
model to become obligatory, it must be possible to integrate the ML model smoothly
into the medical workflow. High accuracy does not translate directly into clinical
utility (Topol 2019). Hence, a clinical suitability criterion is necessary since ML
models pose particular challenges in terms of interpretation and integration into
medical routines, as the Watson case showed. Again, such smooth functioning in
the field generally includes the explainability of the model to an extent that deci-
sion makers can adopt a critical stance toward the model’s recommendations (see,
in detail, below, Sect. 3.1.2, Use of the model). Note that this criterion is independ-
ent of the one just discussed: it does not involve a trade-off with accuracy. Rather,
explainability per se is general pre-condition for the duty (but not for the legitimacy)
to use ML models: while it may be legitimate to use a black box model (our first cri-
terion), there is, as a general principle, no duty to use it. A critical, reasoned stance
toward a black box model’s advice is difficult to achieve, and the model will be dif-
ficult to implement into the medical workflow. As a general rule, therefore, explain-
ability is a necessary condition for a duty to use the model, but not for the legitimacy
of the use of a model. The clinical suitability criterion is particularly important in
medical contexts where the consequences of false positive or false negative out-
comes may be particularly undesirable (Caruana 2015; Zech et al. 2018; Rudin and
Ustun 2018). Therefore, doctors must be in a position to check the reasons for a
specific outcome. Novel techniques of local explainability of even highly complex
models may provide for such features (Ribeiro et al. 2016; Lapuschkin et al. 2019).

Q) Springer
Explainable Al under contract and tort law: legal incentives... 423

Exceptionally, however, the use of black box models with supra-human accuracy
may one day become obligatory if their field performance on some dimension (e.g.,
sensitivity) is exceptionally high (e.g.,> 0.95) and hence there is a reduced need for
arguing with the model within its high performance space (e.g., avoidance of false
negatives). While such extremely powerful, non-explainable models still seem quite
a long way off in the field (Topol 2019), there may one day be a duty, restricted to
their high performance domain, to use them if suitable routines for cases of disa-
greement with the model can be established. For example, if a doctor disagrees with
a close-to-perfect black box model, the case may be internally reviewed by a larger
panel of (human) specialists. Again, if these routines can be integrated into the med-
ical workflow, the second criterion is fulfilled.

Finally, third, the cost of the model must be justified with respect to the total
revenue of the healthcare provider for the latter to be obliged to adopt it (Froomkin
2018). Theoretically, licensing costs could be prohibitive for smaller practices. In
this case, they will, however, have to refer the patient to a practice equipped with the
state-of-the-art ML tool.

While these criteria partly rely on empirical questions (particularly the first one),
courts are in a position to exercise independent judgment with respect to their nor-
mative aspects (Greenberg 2009). Even clinical practice guidelines indicate, but do
not conclusively decide, a (lack of) negligence in specific cases (Laufs 1990).

In sum, to avoid negligence, medical doctors need not resort to the most accurate
product, including ML models, but to state-of-the-art products that reach an accept-
able level of accuracy. However, this level of accuracy should be adjusted upwards if
ML models are shown to be consistently superior to human decision making, if they
can be reasonably integrated into the medical workflow, and if they are cost-justified
for the individual health-care provider. The choice of the concrete model, in turn,
depends on the trade-off between explainability and accuracy, which varies between
different models.

Use of the model Importantly, even when the use of some ML model 1s justified
or even obligatory, there must be room for reasoned disagreement with the model.
Concrete guidelines for the legal consequences of the use of the model are basi-
cally lacking in the literature. However, we may draw on scholarship regarding evi-
dence-based medicine to tackle this problem. This strand of medicine uses statistical
methods (for example randomized controlled trials) to develop appropriate treatment
methods and displace routines based on tradition and intuition where these are not
upheld by empirical evidence (Timmermans and Mauck 2005; Rosoff 2001). The
use of ML models pursues a similar aim. While it does, at this stage, typically not
include randomized controlled trials (Topol 2019), it is also based on empirical data
and seeks to improve on intuitive treatment methods.

Of course, even models superior to human judgment on average will gen-
erate some false negative and false positive recommendations. Hence, the use
of the model should always only be part of a more comprehensive assessment,
which includes and draws on medical experience (Froomkin 2018). Doctors, or
other professional agents, must not be reduced to mere executors of ML judg-
ments. If there is sufficient, professionally grounded reason to believe the model
is wrong in a particular case, its decision must be overridden. In this case, such

Q) Springer
424 P. Hacker et al.

a departure from the model must not trigger liability—irrespective of whether
the model was in fact wrong or right in retrospect. This is because negligence
law does not sanction damaging outcomes, as strict liability does, but attaches
hability only to actions failing the standard of care. Hence, even if the doctor’s
more comprehensive assessment is eventually wrong and the model predic-
tion was right, the doctor is shielded from medical malpractice claims as long
as his reasons for departing from the model were based on grounds justified
on the basis of professional knowledge and behavior. Conversely, not depart-
ing a wrong model prediction would breach the standard of care if, and only
if, the reasons for departure were sufficiently obvious to a professional (Droste
2018). An example may be an outlier case, which, most likely, did not form part
of the training data of the ML model, cf. Rudin (2019). However, as long as
such convincing reasons for model correction cannot be advanced, the model’s
advice may be heeded without incurring liability, even if it was wrong in retro-
spect (Thomas 2017). This is a key inside of the scholarship on evidence-based
medicine (Wagner 2018). The reason for this rule is that, if the model indeed
is provably superior to human professional judgment, following the model will
on average produce less harm than a departure from the model (Wagner 2018).
Potentially, a patient could, in these cases, direct a product liability claim against
the provider of the ML model (Droste 2018).

Particularly in ML contexts, human oversight, and the possibility to disa-
gree with the model based on medical reasons, seems of utmost importance:
ML often makes mistakes humans would not make (and vice versa). Hence,
the possibility of reasoned departure from even a supra-human model creates a
machine-human-team, which likely works better than either machine or human
alone (Thomas 2017; Froomkin 2018). Importantly, the obligation to override
the model in case of professional reasons ensures that blindly following the
model, and withholding individual judgment, is not a liability-minimizing strat-
egy for doctors.

3.1.3. Short summary of case study 1

Summing up, ML models are approaching, and in some cases even surpass-
ing, human decision-making capacity in the medical realm. However, the legal
standard of care should be adjusted only upward by the introduction of such
models if (1) they are proven to be consistently outperforming professional
actors and other models, (2) they can be smoothly integrated into the medical
workflow, and (3) its use is cost-justified for the concrete healthcare provider.
Conditions (1) and (2) are intimately related to the explainability of the model.
If Condition (1) is justified, the use of the model per se does not trigger medial
hability. If all three are justified, failure to use it leads to liability. Finally, when
a model’s use is justified and even when it is obligatory, doctors are compelled,
under negligence law, to exercise independent judgment and may disagree with
the model, based on professional reasons, without risking legal liability.

Q) Springer
Explainable Al under contract and tort law: legal incentives... 425

3.2 Mergers and acquisition

Similar issues arise when machine learning models are used to predict the trans-
action value of companies (Zuo et al. 2017). Again, the standard of care manag-
ers have to employ with respect to due diligence and other preparatory steps to a
merger, but as well in the decision proper, are themselves shaped by state-of-the-art
technology, namely information retrieval techniques. If managers fail to use novel,
ML-driven methods, which are required by the applicable standard of care, the
question of liability arises. One particular feature in transactional contexts (M&A)
has to be seen, however, in the high transaction costs of mergers and acquisitions.
Therefore, the business judgment rule to be applied in this context is seen to require
rather conservative models. This might imply that methods with low false positive
rates (recommending a transaction) should be preferred for matters of risk analysis
and due diligence. Once ML models surpass a certain threshold of predictive value,
reducing false positive rates, it may become mandatory for directors to use these
models to avail themselves of the business judgment rule, i.e., the rule that protects
managers from liability if their predictions turn out to be wrong. It may even be that
also false negative rates—even though much less likely to raise concerns—could
become a concern for managers, albeit more from a managerial success, not a liabil-
ity point of view.

3.2.1 The rise of ML valuation tools

Indeed, ML models using a variety of techniques are increasingly entering also the
field of mergers and acquisitions (Jiang 2018). A first set of papers analyses due
to which factors mergers have come about in the past, using machine learning. For
example, a group of researchers developed a model, based on latest machine learn-
ing applied to so-called earnings call transcripts, analyzed the role of different types
of corporate culture on the number and the rapidity of mergers (Li 2018)—however,
not yet reporting on later failure of the mergers analyzed. Earnings call transcripts
are summaries of conversations between CEOs, in part also CFOs with analysts that
(indirectly) show what is seen as being essential at the most professional conversa-
tion level. The results found incrementally suggested that corporate culture focusing
on innovation can be distinguished from corporate culture focusing on quality and
that two conclusions can be drawn. The first conclusion is that firms with a corporate
culture focusing on innovation are more likely to be acquirers than firms with a cor-
porate culture focusing on quality. In the second conclusion, authors find that firms
with the same or a more similar corporate culture (from the same of both categories
named or also within them) tend to be merged more often and with less transaction
costs. While the first conclusion appears to be more descriptive and of less immedi-
ate impact on a legal assessment, and while the second set of conclusions seem not
really astonishing, at least the core distinction is more refined than normally found
in corporate literature. Moreover, transaction costs are certainly one of the key infor-
mation parameters to be analyzed and taken into account in an assessment under the
business judgment rule (see below).

Q) Springer
426 P. Hacker et al.

In a second set of articles, researchers focused on particular countries, because of
the strong varieties of capitalism element in corporate mergers, for instance Japan,
partly still before machine learning, partly with machine learning based on a large-
scale data set concentrating on the Japanese corporate setting (Shibayama 2008;
Shao et al. 2018).

Even the earlier study would potentially largely profit from machine learning.
The studies are different, but both focus on rather substantial sets of data, one on
cash flow analyses—still in some part to be conducted. The other study came to
the (non-machine learning based) conclusion that knowledge transfer—so important
as a motive for mergers—leads indeed to increased innovation (with respect to the
development of drugs). According to authors, however, this is not universally true,
indeed not so much in the case of a merger of equals (at least in Japan), but of non-
equals (big and small), and moreover innovation then takes place mainly in the first
few years (two to three). The data set used in the study might form an ideal test case
for a comparative assessment of the respective strengths and reliabilities of conven-
tional analyses in the area of mergers (focusing on one industry in one big country)
and machine-based analyses.

However, in practical, but also in legal terms, the development of machine learn-
ing in mergers and acquisitions seems to lag behind that in medical care (and mal-
practice) rather considerably. This is implied by the relatively low number of empiri-
cal publications and applications in this field. Hence, it is safe to infer that by sheer
numbers, mergers supported by machine learning account only for a very small
fraction of mergers. A duty to use these techniques is therefore imaginable only in
the future. Moreover, the techniques used so far use both supervised and unsuper-
vised techniques of learning, with only very recent discussion and evaluation of the
comparative advantages (Jiang 2018). Finally, the decisive question of how high the
failure rate is when using results with and without machine learning is still basi-
cally undecided. This shows that rigorous field validation is necessary before ML
models can be safely used in corporate/merger contexts—an issue that informs our
analysis of the legal prerequisites for the adoption of such models. This also shows
that designs of machine learning still have to be better adapted (also) to those ques-
tions that are legally decisive, namely to the question of failure that is core for the
most important legal issue, 1.e., liability (of course, also a core question in economic
terms).

3.2.2 Legal liability: the business judgment rule

With ML technology approaching, and potentially (in the future) even surpassing,
human capacities in due diligence and other decisional steps to be taken in mergers
and acquisitions, namely in the choice and evaluation of a target firm, the question
arises whether the failure to use such models may constitute a violation of the duty
of care. For setting the standard of care in such decisions, its attenuation via the so-
called business judgment rule has to be taken into account. The relevant legal provi-
sions under corporate law (again) differ from country to country. We again offer a
legal analysis in which we generally refer to German and US law in particular; nev-
ertheless, general normative guidelines can be formulated.

Q) Springer
Explainable Al under contract and tort law: legal incentives... 427

Adoption For setting the legally required parameters correctly, a model has to
start from the rather nuanced legal basis of such decision taking—in which avoid-
ing false positives would seem to be more required than avoiding false negatives.
Contrary to what has been explained for ML in medicine, the use of ML does not
require permission by the competent authority, but is within the decision power of
managers, while the situation is similar for the second point. Again, the question
whether the avoidance of legal liability compels the adoption of such a model has
(to our knowledge) not been discussed in literature nor in the courts. The answer
to this question crucially depends on whether it is considered negligent under cor-
porate law standards, such as Section 93 of the German Stock Corporation Code
(Aktiengesetz).

Germany and the US both distinguish between a very demanding standard of
professional care boards and managers have to exercise—Germany in an even more
outspoken way (Hopt and Roth 2015)—, and an application of the so-called business
judgment rule. Indeed, both jurisdictions also attenuate the strict standard of care in
genuine business decisions via application of the business judgment rule. This rule
has been introduced also in Germany—on the model of US law—in section 93 para.
1(2) of the Stock Corporation Code, different, for instance, from UK law (Kraak-
man 2017; Varzaly 2012). In principle, this rule is aimed at giving managers more
lee-way in such decisions and foster courageous decision taking in genuine business
matters, giving rather extended discretion to boards/managers whenever the decision
made does not appear to be utterly mistaken. This also guards against hindsight bias
in evaluating managerial decisions. The rule nevertheless has its limits. Among the
most important are the prerequisite of legality—legal limits have to be respected,
namely those of penal law as in the famous Ackermann case of Deutsche Bank
(Kraakman 2017)—, but additionally—and still more important in our context—the
informational basis for a decision has to be retrieved in a sufficiently professional
way. Thus courts restrict scrutiny in content to the outer limits, but substitute such
scrutiny by stricter procedural rules—namely on information retrieval. A core lim-
iting factor for the adoption and use of ML is the regulation of the structure of a
merger (in the narrow sense) or acquisition (takeover) under European, German and
US Law. It requires not only full information of the board (within the business judg-
ment rule), but also ample disclosure and co-decision taking by other bodies within
the companies—thus making explainability of the process and the results reached
via ML paramount (Grundmann 2012).

Given this legal basis, one can, in principle, refer to the tree criteria developed
above for medical malpractice (and their discussion) also for the corporate merger
setting. In the corporate setting, it would, first, also not constitute improper use of
resources if management recurred to ML techniques only once a significant differ-
ence between the performance of the model and human-only decision making in its
absence can be shown—again in a number of independent studies, also validated in
real world settings. In contrast to the medical context, however, false positives and
false negatives tend in principle not to have the same weight in corporate mergers
and acquisitions. Rather, for the reasons given (transaction costs), a low false posi-
tive rate would in principle have to be the prime standard and target of such assess-
ment. Again, this shows that explainability is key: to evaluate whether a prediction

Q) Springer
428 P. Hacker et al.

might be incorrectly positive, an explanation will generally be required. Hence, the
trade-off between accuracy and explainability explored in the section on medical
malpractice reproduces in the corporate setting, too. Second, for the standard of care
to be adjusted upward, it must be possible to integrate the ML model smoothly into
the procedure of a merger and acquisition undertaking, namely disclosure and possi-
bility of independent decision taking in several distinct bodies. Again, smooth func-
tioning therefore includes the explainability of the model to an extent that decision
makers can adopt a critical stance toward the model’s recommendations. Third, the
cost of ML is, however, less important. Companies need not refrain from a transac-
tion if they cannot reasonably afford the costs of ML—as no third party is affected
by the decision to an intolerable extent. Rather, management has to make an over-
all cost-benefit analysis, in which the cost of ML will be one, but only one, factor.
Given the high stakes usually at play in corporate mergers and acquisitions, the cost
of ML will rarely be dispositive.

Use of the Model In the corporate setting, questions of use of the model are
shaped still more prominently by the factual basis of the subject matter and by the
structure of legal rules, namely the business judgment rule. These peculiarities
render the results reached above for medical malpractice still more important and
unquestionable in corporate law. First, mergers and acquisitions are generally not
very successful in the long-term (Jiang 2018)—the failure rate after five years from
when the transaction is carried through amounts to up to 50% according to some
studies. Moreover, the business judgment rule allows not only discretion whenever
proper research (information retrieval) has been accomplished, but it also imposes
an evaluation of the information found by the managers. Thus, in terms of content,
the discretion is large; in terms of procedure, only intolerable deviation from infor-
mation properly retrieved constitutes a ground for liability. Hence, managers may in
most cases override the machine recommendation. Of course, managers will take
into account also factors that are not legal in the narrow sense (legal limits related),
namely the preferences of the body of shareholders and other constituencies.

The overall conclusion would seem to be the same as in malpractice cases. Par-
ticularly in ML contexts, human oversight, and the possibility to disagree with the
model based on entrepreneurial reasons, seems of high importance: ML makes mis-
takes humans would not make (and vice versa, potentially even more often one day).
Hence, in corporate contexts, too, a machine-human-team, which likely works better
than either machine or human alone. Importantly, the possibility to disagree often
presupposes explainability. Furthermore, withholding individual judgment is not a
liability-minimizing strategy for managers, either. Therefore, there are no incentives
for refraining from a reasoned departure from the model.

3.2.3 Short summary of case study 2

Summing up, ML models are approaching, and in the future potentially even sur-
passing, human decision-making capacity also in the corporate mergers realm.
However, the legal standard of care should be adjusted only upward by the introduc-
tion of such models if (1) they are proven to be consistently outperforming profes-
sional actors and other models, and, due to disclosure requirements and multiple

Q) Springer
Explainable Al under contract and tort law: legal incentives... 429

party decision making, when (2) they are used as interactive techniques that can be
explained to and critically assessed by humans. Given the size and the timeframe
of the transactions, integration into the process is basically not a concern (different
from the malpractice cases). As in that case, managers must be obliged to exercise
independent judgment and may disagree with the model, based on professional rea-
sons, without risking legal liability.

3.2.4 Key results from case studies 1 and 2: contractual explainability

Both the case study on medical malpractice and on corporate mergers show that,
from a legal point of view, explainability is often at least as important as predic-
tive performance to determine whether the law allows or even requires the use of
ML tools under professional standards of care. Most notably, this conclusion is inde-
pendent of the debate on the extent to which the European GDPR does or does not
require the explainability of certain algorithmic models (see above, under Sect. 2).
The criteria developed for assessing the necessity of explainable AI stem, legally
speaking, not from data protection law but from specific domains of contract and
tort law. As such, they are not confined to the EU, but apply equally in all countries
with negligence regimes, in contract and tort law, similar to our reference jurisdic-
tions: the US and Germany. Since there has been a considerable degree of conver-
gence in EU contract law in the past decades (Twigg-Flessner 2013), the guidelines
we develop apply, at least broadly, both in US and in EU law. In the third case study,
we therefore examine more in detail the interaction, and trade-off, between perfor-
mance and explainability from a technical perspective.

4 Explanations and accuracy

As seen, data protection law, but even more importantly contract and tort law may
require models to be explainable in the sense of offering an explanation for an auto-
matically made decision. These explanations ensure that algorithms can be intro-
spected to check whether the decisions they made are fair and unbiased. This legal
requirement also helps engineers to better understand the models they build. By
being able to explain the model’s decision, flaws in the training data or the model
architecture can be detected, e.g., when the image classifier explains a classification
decision by focusing on the background of the image instead of the object to be clas-
sified. But what is an explanation that meets the legal requirements and is techni-
cally sound?

Miller (2019) investigates explanations from a philosophical, psychological,
and cognitive science view and discusses how explanations work for humans.
Since 1748, when David Hume presented his ideas on the importance of causal-
ity and counterfactual reasoning for explanations (Hume 2016), many new theo-
ries have been proposed, but they are all more or less extensions of the idea of
counterfactuals. While a causal chain explains a certain state or decision techni-
cally, this is typically not accepted as an explanation by the non-expert users of
a system. Instead—and these are two major findings of Miller (2019), (1) people

Q) Springer
430 P. Hacker et al.

select one or two causes out of possibly infinite causes to be the explanation and
(2) explanations are often expected to be contrastive.

Regarding (2), this means that explainable AI can be reduced to finding the
difference between two alternatives. Even if the alternative is not explicitly
stated, e.g., in image classification, the question of a user could be “why was this
image classified as depicting a dog?”, seemingly requiring an explanation about
the working of the (potentially very complex) classification algorithm, while in
reality, the explanation should target a more specific question, e.g.: “Why was
this image classified as depicting a dog and not a wolf?’. In this case, the expla-
nation could be easier generated by summarizing the differences between dogs
and wolves.

Regarding (1), choosing from a multitude of causes to generate an explanation
is very context-dependent and potentially influenced by cognitive bias. This selec-
tion of causes makes it on the one hand easier to explain decisions of AI algorithms,
since not the complete causal chain needs to be presented. On the other hand, select-
ing the “right” cause accepted by a user with given bias and context is far from
trivial. In the past, this was an easier problem: Traditional AI, or more precisely,
machine learning (ML) algorithms, were primarily linear models that could be
inspected by human experts and explained even to non-professionals. A rule learned
by a decision tree model, for example, could state if x > 3.4 then y = 1. The model
explained itself by giving a cause for its decision; no additional explanation was
needed.

With more recent and more complex models, such self-explanations became
unintuitive or even impossible. With the growing size of complex, non-linear mod-
els, not even experts can easily explain the outcome due to the huge number of
parameters involved. With the missing inherent explanations, the question arose how
to explain the models’ output if not even experts can understand the models as a
whole. This need for explanation—a basic human desire to learn and trust—shifts
the focus away from the model and towards the explanation (Monroe 2018). Just as
humans have different explanations for their decisions and behavior, there are also
different kinds of explanations for AI models.

When we look at different models, there seems to be a trade-off between model
accuracy and explainability of the model—yjust like the legal discussion presup-
posed. In Fig. 1 we extended the graphic from DARPA’s explainable AI program*
to visualize the trade-off between explainability and the accuracy of various model
types. This general notion of explainability is broken down into more fine-grained
definitions of explainability types in the following section.

4.1 Explanation type

Understanding models in detail with millions of parameters is not feasible. What
can be hoped for, though, is to find some explanation that satisfies the need for

> https://www.darpa.mil/attachments/XAIProgramUpdate.pdf.

Q) Springer
Explainable Al under contract and tort law: legal incentives... 431

Neural Network Ensemble

   

 

Probabilistic

 

Distance-Based

Prediction Accuracy

Rule-Based

 
 
   

Explainability

Fig. 1 Accuracy and explainability trade-off

interpretability of models at a specific level of abstraction. Lipton identified different
kinds of explanations relevant to machine learning algorithms depending on spe-
cific model characteristics (Lipton 2018). Explanations can be broadly associated
with transparency and post-hoc interpretability. Models that are highly transparent
are self-explanatory whereas post-hoc interpretability is a characteristic that allows
explaining decisions after the model’s inference step. The following list is a sum-
mary of Lipton (2018).

1. Transparency describes how easily a model can be understood.

(a) At the level of the entire model: simulatability
(b) At the level of individual components: decomposability
(c) At the level of the learning algorithm: algorithmic transparency

2. Post-hoc interpretability describes how easily a decision by a learned model can
be explained.

(a) By visualizing what a model has learned: visualization
(b) By analyzing the parameters for a single decision: local explanations
(c) By finding and presenting the most similar examples: explanation by exam-

ple

Lipton associates explainability with interpretability whereas understanding is con-
nected with transparency. Biran and Cotton (2017) define an explainable model
based on how easy it is for a human to understand a model’s decision either by intro-
spection or by a generated explanation. Both emphasize the dual character of trans-
parency and interpretability for explanations.

Q) Springer
432 P. Hacker et al.

Table 1 Different models

. a. Models Transparency

and their accessibility to

explanations Simulatability Decomposability Algorithmic
Rule-based High High High
Tree-based High High Medium
Linear Medium Medium High
Distance-based Medium Medium High
Probabilistic Medium Medium High
Ensemble Low Low Medium
Neural network Low Low Low

These different notions of explanations lend themselves to different kinds of
machine learning models. In general, less complex models are more transparent and
necessitate less often post-hoc interpretations to explain their decisions sufficiently.

4.2 ML model type
Flach (2012) categorizes machine learning models into seven broad classes:

1. Rule models learn easy to interpret rules. A prototypical model is the naive Bayes
model (NB).

2. Tree models learn a hierarchy of rules. A prototypical model is the decision tree
model (DT).

3. Linear models learn to combine input variables linearly to produce output. A
prototypical model is the support vector machine model (SVM).

4. Distance-based models learn similarity between instances. A prototypical model
is the k-nearest neighbour model (kNN).

5. Probabilistic models learn (conditional) probabilities for possible outcomes. A
prototypical model is logistic regression (LR).

6. Ensembles learn to combine different algorithms. A prototypical model is the
random forest model (RF).

7. Deep neural networks learn weight tensors to transform an input to a target output.
Prototypical models are convolutional neural networks (CNN).

There are also other categorizations to divide the model space and the proposed
classification of these models is not the only valid one.* Naive Bayes is rather a
probabilistic model but it is very simple to deduce rules from it therefor we use
naive Bayes instead of, e.g., association rules as the prototypical rule-based model.
This categorization shall serve our purpose to investigate explainability in more
detail based on individual model types. To this end, we picked a prototypical model
for each model class and looked at how accessible it is to each explanation type.

* See, e.g., https:/Awww.darpa.mil/attachments/X AIProgramUpdate.pdf for a slightly different grouping.

Q) Springer
Explainable Al under contract and tort law: legal incentives... 433

Table 2 Different models and their accessibility to interpretation and performance

Models Post-hoc interpretability Performance
Visualization Local By example

Rule-based High High Medium Low
Tree-based High High Medium Medium
Linear High High High Medium
Distance-based Low Medium High Low
Probabilistic High High High Medium
Ensemble Low Medium Medium High

Deep neural network High Medium High High

4.3 Model/explanation matrix

We investigate how well individual models are suited for the different types of
explanations. To this end, we group the models for each explanation type into high,
medium, and low. “High” means that the model exhibits a specific property to a
large degree, and “low” means that the model possesses this property only to a small
extent. Tables 1 and 2 shows our classification of the suitability of the various model
types.

Regarding the results, there is an apparent trade-off between transparency and
performance. Especially for complex problems, such as object recognition in com-
puter vision or machine translation in natural language processing, the best perform-
ing models are also the ones inherently not transparent. Approaches for explaining
these models are subject to current research (Samek et al. 2017; Montavon et al.
2017; Bach et al. 2015; Lapuschkin et al. 2019; Rudin 2019). For highly complex
models visualization seems to be the most promising type of explanation. The main
idea researchers are pursuing to this end is to visualize salient parts of the input,
e.g., of an image (Simonyan et al. 2013), or of text (Arras et al. 2017). Gilpin et al.
(2018) argue that these current methods produce explanations that are not sufficient,
and that combining these methods and measures is needed to obtain explanations
from deep learning models that are acceptable as such for humans.

4.4 Example: automatic spam detection

To substantiate our discussion above, we present our evaluation of a concrete exam-
ple use-case. A standard task for machine learning is document classification. To
make the problem as clear and simple as possible, we chose spam classification, 1.e.,
a binary classification of a given SMS into “spam” or “no-spam”. We use a dataset
of 5574 SMS messages (Almeida et al. 2013). For simplicity, we ignore additional
information, such as the sender of an SMS, and use only the actual text in the mes-
sage. To compare the models, we split the data into training and test set. In the train-
ing set, there are 3233 ham SMS and 500 spam SMS. In the test set there are 1592
ham SMS and 247 spam SMS.

Q) Springer
434 P. Hacker et al.

Table 3 Different models and

. . - Models Clas-
their classification accuracy for sification
SMS-spam prediction accuracy

Deep neural network: CNN 0.985
Linear: SVM 0.983
Probabilistic: LR 0.978
Rule-based: NB 0.977
Ensemble: RF 0.976
Tree-based: DT 0.965
Distance-based: kNN 0.948

Spam detection does not require overly complicated models. The existence of cer-
tain keywords (e.g., “promotion”, “offer”, “Viagra’’, etc.) is often enough to identify
unsolicited messages. Given this simple task where a deeper understanding of sen-
tences or context is not necessary, simpler models not only explain the predictions
better but even outperform more complex models. Our results for SMS-spam clas-
sification, which are similar to the ones reported by Almeida et al. (2013), are shown
in Table 3. We compare the prototypical models as described in Sect. 4.2. For this
task, very simple models, such as naive Bayes can outperform more complex mod-
els, e.g. ensemble models, such as random forests, under certain conditions, e.g., if
only a small amount of annotated training data is available. These simple models
can easily explain their predictions. Since they usually assume that input features are
independent (naive Bayes assumption), the mere occurrence of a word in the mes-
sage explains a certain prediction. E.g., the word “free” (lowercase) occurs 52 times
in spam SMS in comparison to 43 times in ham SMS, even though there are much
more ham SMS than spam ones. If one considers the word “FREE” (uppercase), the
ratio is overwhelmingly in favor of spam: it occurs only once in a ham SMS, but 134
times in spam SMS. A simple rule, such as ifan SMS contains the terms “free” and
“camcorder” then classify it as spam, results in 100% accuracy without any wrong
predictions in the complete data set and directly explains the decision (occurrence of
these two words).

Therefore, it is not enough from a computer science research perspective to
focus on making complex models explainable, but also to choose the right model
for the task at hand. The trade-off between performance and accuracy might only
hold for a subset of particularly complex problems (Rudin 2019; Chen et al. 2018),
such as image classification and machine translation. Unfortunately, the human need
for explanations is higher for complex problems, where models can achieve supra-
human accuracy. “Obvious” predictions do not require explanation.

4.5 Outlook: interactions between technology and the law
Different models differ widely in the degree to which the decisive features and

weights of the model can be extracted (Burrell 2016). Under decision trees, at least
in theory, the algorithmic output can be determined by walking from the trees’ root

Q) Springer
Explainable Al under contract and tort law: legal incentives... 435

along branches to the terminal leaves. At the very opposite end of the spectrum,
deep neural networks do not lend themselves to an easy explanation, both because
it is difficult to extract decision weights from the highly non-linear mathemati-
cal model (Li et al. 2018), and because hidden layers may operate with features
that bear no resemblance to any concepts easily understandable by humans (Bur-
rell 2016). However, recent advances in interpretable machine learning show that
it may be possible to train a second model to approximate, if not globally, at least
locally the behavior of the model that needs to be explained (Ribeiro et al. 2016).
This means that, at least for specific instances of decisions, positive and negative
decision factors can potentially be identified. What is more, other approaches even
allow to test to what extent specific, human-understandable concepts were used by
the deep neural network in its classification process (Kim et al. 2018). Importantly,
this may allow a doctor, for example, to determine whether the algorithmic output
is likely based on an “accurate understanding” of the training data; this helps to
evaluate whether the performance of the model translates to real-world examples,
or not (Ribeiro et al. 2016; Kim et al. 2018; Lapuschkin et al. 2019). Similarly, risk
assessment experts in companies could seek to verify, via interpretable machine
learning, to what extent the model fits the specific context they are deploying it in.
As has been noted, more accurate models [refined via LASSO, for example Tibshi-
rani (1996)] may even sometimes be more explainable as they pick up less spurious
correlations from the training data and focus on the “relevant” correlations (Selbst
and Barocas 2018); these can then be the basis for an explanation. All in all, while
interpretable machine learning certainly still has a long way to go, the advent of
explainability requirements will likely inject even more force into these models.
Their development and deployment will likely benefit both decision makers and data
subjects in the long run. Again, the law impels the adoption of socially desirable
machine learning technology.

Conversely, technological progress has important implications for the law. In
order to make the cost-benefit analysis trading off the accuracy against the explain-
ability of different models, non-technical professionals like medical doctors and cor-
porate managers will likely either need to acquire technical expertise on their own or
work with professional developers of machine learning applications. This is particu-
larly important since, as our experiment with the spam prediction model showed,
increased explainability need not necessarily imply reduced accuracy. To be sure,
we selected a simple problem (spam classification) to show the trade-off between
accuracy and simplicity/transparency of models. For more complicated problem set-
tings, general explanation generation algorithms and trade-offs between accuracy
and explainability are hard to come by. Hence, often, there are only very specialized
solutions for experts to inspect the models, making the transdisciplinary teaming
even more important.

Nevertheless, data-driven validation of the trade-off in the respective areas of
application seems necessary. In fact, the increased adoption of ML tools will lead,
we posit, not only to an increased importance of human-machine-teaming, but also
to the emergence of more interdisciplinary work units within business organizations.
In order to meet the requirements imposed by contract and tort law, sector specific
experts, such as medical doctors or corporate managers, will often have to team up

Q) Springer
436 P. Hacker et al.

with professional developers of machine learning applications in order to correctly
evaluate the different models at their disposal. This is certainly not a bad thing:
potentially, the law in this sense sets incentives for fruitful interdisciplinary collabo-
rations that lead to progress both on the professional and on the technical side of the
respective fields.

5 Conclusion

In conclusion, we have shown that the relationship of AI and the law is more com-
plex than policy analysis often suggests. The law not only limits AI technology;
it often sets incentives for, or even mandates the application of, the use of mod-
els when their very use minimizes the risk of liability. However, the devil is in
the details. Machine learning research offers an ever wider array of input patterns,
model types, and different performance metrics. Some of these will be particularly
suited to certain legal tasks, such as risk analysis or contract compliance; others
will indeed face limitations from anti-discrimination or data protection law. Even
these constraints, however, may eventually be helpful for guiding machine learning
research, by setting incentives for developing socially optimal, accurate and inter-
pretable models—or at least for raising awareness among professionals of the extent
to which these parameters have to be traded off to make an informed decision about
whether or not to adopt a specific ML model in the fist place.

Acknowledgements : Open Access funding provided by Projekt DEAL.

Funding The research for this article was in part (Philipp Hacker) supported by an AXA Postdoctoral
Scholarship awarded by the AXA Research Fund.

Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licen
ses/by/4.0/.

References

Almeida T, Hidalgo JMG, Silva TP (2013) Towards sms spam filtering: results under a new dataset. Int J
Inf Secur Sci 2(1):1-18

Arras L, Horn F, Montavon G, Miiller KR, Samek W (2017) What is relevant in a text document?: An
interpretable machine learning approach. PloS one 12(8):e0181142

Q) Springer
Explainable Al under contract and tort law: legal incentives... 437

Bach S, Binder A, Montavon G, Klauschen F, Miiller KR, Samek W (2015) On pixel-wise explanations
for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise relevance propagation. PloS one 10(7):e0130140

Biran O, Cotton C (2017) Explanation and justification in machine learning: a survey. In: IJCAI-17 work-
shop on explainable AI (XAI), pp 1-6

Burrell J (2016) How the machine thinks: understanding opacity in machine learning algorithms. Big
Data Soc 3(1):205395 1715622512

Calo R (2016) Robots in American law. University of Washington School of Law Research Paper
(2016-04)

Caruana R (2015) Intelligible models for healthcare. In: Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD interna-
tional conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, vol 21, pp 1721-1730

Chen C, Lin K, Rudin C, Shaposhnik Y, Wang S, Wang T (2018) An interpretable model with globally
consistent explanations for credit risk. arXiv preprint arXiv:181112615

Cowgill B (2017) Automating judgement and decision-making: theory and evidence from résumé screen-
ing. In: Columbia University, 2015 Empirical Management Conference

De Fauw J (2018) Clinically applicable deep learning for diagnosis and referral in retinal disease. Nat
Med 24(9):1342

Ding Y (2018) A deep learning model to predict a diagnosis of alzheimer disease by using 18F-FDG PET
of the brain. Radiology 290:456—-464

Doshi-Velez F (2017) Accountability of AI under the law: the role of explanation. arXiv preprint arXiv
7171101134

Droste W (2018) Intelligente Medizinprodukte. Zeitschrift fr das gesamte Medizinprodukterecht
18(4):109-114

Esteva A, Kuprel B, Novoa RA, Ko J, Swetter SM, Blau HM, Thrun S (2017) Dermatologist-level clas-
sification of skin cancer with deep neural networks. Nature 542(7639):115

Flach P (2012) Machine learning: the art and science of algorithms that make sense of data. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge

Froomkin M (2018) When Als outperform doctors: confronting the challenges of a tort-induced over-
reliance on machine learning. Arizona Law Review, Forthcoming; University of Miami Legal Stud-
ies 18(3)

Gilpin LH, Bau D, Yuan BZ, Bajwa A, Specter M, Kagal L (2018) Explaining explanations: an over-
view of interpretability of machine learning. In: 5th International conference on data science and
advanced analytics (DSAA), pp 80-89

Goodman B, Flaxman S (2016) Eu regulations on algorithmic decision-making and a right to explana-
tion. In: ICML workshop on human interpretability in machine learning (WHI 2016), New York,
NY. arxiv:1606.08813 v1

Goodman B, Flaxman S (2017) European union regulations on algorithmic decision-making and a right
to explanation. AI Mag 38(3):50-57

Greenberg MD (2009) Medical malpractice and new devices: defining an elusive standard of care. Health
Matrix 19:423

Grundmann S (2012) European company law—organization finance and capital markets. Intersentia,
Cambridge

Hart D (2000) Evidenz-basierte Medizin und Gesundheitsrecht. MedR-Medizinrecht 18(1):1—5

Hopt KJ, Roth WH (2015) Sorgfaltspflicht und verantwortlichkeit der vorstandsmitglieder. In: Grokom-
mentar Aktiengesetz, vol 4(2). de Gruyter, p §93

Hume D (2016) An enquiry concerning human understanding. In: Seven masterpieces of philosophy,
Routledge, pp 191-284

Jaklevic C (2017) MD Anderson cancer centers IBM Watson project fails, and so did the journalism
related to it. Health News Review

Jiang T (2018) Using machine learning to analyze merger activity. Working paper UC Davis, 16 March
2018. http://giovanniperi.ucdavis.edu/uploads/5/6/8/2/56826033/tiffany_jiang.pdf. Accessed 10 Nov
2019

Katzenmeier C (2006) Aufklaérung tiber neue medizinische Behandlungsmethoden—Robodoc

Kim B, Wattenberg M, Gilmer J, Cai C, Wexler J, Viegas F (2018) Interpretability beyond feature attri-
bution: quantitative testing with concept activation vectors (tcav). In: International conference on
machine learning, pp 2673-2682

Komorowski M, Celi LA, Badawi O, Gordon AC, Faisal AA (2018) The artificial intelligence clinician
learns optimal treatment strategies for sepsis in intensive care. Nat Med 24(11):1716

Q) Springer
438 P. Hacker et al.

Kourou K, Exarchos TP, Exarchos KP, Karamouzis MV, Fotiadis DI (2015) Machine learning applica-
tions in cancer prognosis and prediction. Comput Struct Biotechnol J 13:8—17

Kraakman R (2017) The anatomy of corporate law—a comparative and functional approach. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford

Lapuschkin S, Waldchen S, Binder A, Montavon G, Samek W, Miiller KR (2019) Unmasking clever hans
predictors and assessing what machines really learn. Nat Commun 10(1):1096

Laufs A (1990) Die Entwicklung des Arztrechts. NJur Wochenschr 24:1507—1513

Li K (2018) Corporate culture and mergers and acquisitions: evidence from machine learning. https://
haslam.utk.edu/sites/default/files/files/LiMaiShen Yan_Corporate%20Culture%20and%20Mer
gers%20and%20Acquisitions_20180429.pdf. Accessed 10 Nov 2019

Li O, Liu H, Chen C, Rudin C (2018) Deep learning for case-based reasoning through prototypes: a
neural network that explains its predictions. In: Thirty-second AAAI conference on artificial
intelligence

Lipton ZC (2018) The mythos of model interpretability. Queue  16(3):30:31-30:57
10.1145/3236386.3241340

Malgieri G, Comandé G (2017) Why a right to legibility of automated decision-making exists in the gen-
eral data protection regulation. Int Data Priv Law 7(6):243—265

Miller T (2019) Explanation in artificial intelligence: insights from the social sciences. Artif Intell
267:1-38

Monroe D (2018) AI, explain yourself. Commun ACM 61(11):11-13

Montavon G, Lapuschkin S, Binder A, Samek W, Miiller KR (2017) Explaining nonlinear classification
decisions with deep taylor decomposition. Pattern Recognit 65:21 1—222

Mori T, Uchihira N (2018) Balancing the trade-off between accuracy and interpretability in software
defect prediction. Empirical Softw Eng 24:1—47

Party ADPW (2017) Guidelines on automated individual decision-making and profiling for the purposes
of regulation 2016/679

Press X (2018) China focus: AI beats human doctors in neuroimaging recognition contest. http://www.
xinhuanet.com/english/2018-06/30/c_137292451.htm. Accessed 10 Nov 2019

Reed C, Kennedy E, Silva S (2016) Responsibility, autonomy and accountability: legal liability for
machine learning. Queen Mary School of Law Legal Studies Research Paper (243)

Ribeiro MT, Singh S, Guestrin C (2016) Why should I trust you?: explaining the predictions of any clas-
sifier. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and
data mining. ACM, pp 1135-1144

Rosoff AJ (2001) Evidence-based medicine and the law: the courts confront clinical practice guidelines. J
Health Politics Policy Law 26(2):327-368

Ross C, Swetlitz I (2018) IBMs watson supercomputer recommended unsafe and incorrect cancer treat-
ments, internal documents show. Stat News. https://www.statnews.com/2018/07/25/ibm-watso
n-recommended-unsafeincorrect-treatments. Accessed 10 Nov 2019

Royal Society (2017) Machine learning: the power and promise of computers that learn by example

Rudin C (2019) Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use
interpretable models instead. Nat Mach Intell 1(5):206

Rudin C, Ustun B (2018) Optimized scoring systems: toward trust in machine learning for healthcare and
criminal justice. Interfaces 48(5):449-466

Samek W, Wiegand T, Miiller KR (2017) Explainable artificial intelligence: understanding, visualizing
and interpreting deep learning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:170808296

Selbst AD (2019) Negligence and AI’s human users. Boston University Law Review, Forthcoming

Selbst AD, Barocas S (2018) The intuitive appeal of explainable machines. Fordham L Rev 87:1085

Selbst AD, Powles J (2017) Meaningful information and the right to explanation. Int Data Priv Law
7(4):233-242

Shao B, Asatani K, Sataka I (2018) Analyzing mergers and acquisitions (M&A) in Japan using AI meth-
ods. In: Proceedings of the annual conference of JSAI. The Japanese Society for Artificial Intel-
ligence, pp 2J1-214

Shibayama S (2008) Effect of mergers and acquisitions on drug discovery: perspective from a case study
of a Japanese pharmaceutical company. Drug Discov Today 13:86—93

Simonyan K, Vedaldi A, Zisserman A (2013) Deep inside convolutional networks: visualising image
classification models and saliency maps

Q) Springer
Explainable Al under contract and tort law: legal incentives... 439

Thomas S (2017) Artificial intelligence, medical malpractice, and the end of defensive medicine. https
://blog.petrieflom.law.harvard.edu/2017/01/26/artificial-intelligence-medical-malpractice-and-the-
end-of-defensive-medicine/. Accessed 10 Nov 2019

Tibshirani R (1996) Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. J R Stat Soc Ser B (Methodol)
58:267-288

Timmermans S, Mauck A (2005) The promises and pitfalls of evidence-based medicine. Health Aff
24(1):18—28

Topol EJ (2019) High-performance medicine: the convergence of human and artificial intelligence. Nat
Med 25(1):44

Twigg-Flessner C (2013) The Europeanisation of European contract law. Routledge, Abingdon

US Food and Drug Administration (2018) FDA permits marketing of artificial intelligence-based device
to detect certain diabetes-related eye problems. News Release, April

Varzaly J (2012) Protecting the authority of directors: an empirical analysis of the statutory business
judgment rule. J Corp Law Stud 12:429-463

Wachter S, Mittelstadt B, Floridi L (2017) Why a right to explanation of automated decision-making does
not exist in the general data protection regulation. Int Data Priv Law 7(2):76-99

Wagner G (2018) Comment on §630a BGB. In: Miinchener Kommentar zum BGB, Verlag CH Beck, pp
405-418

Weng SF, Reps J, Kai J, Garibaldi JM, Qureshi N (2017) Can machine-learning improve cardiovascular
risk prediction using routine clinical data? PloS one 12(4):e0174944

Wischmeyer T (2018) Regulierung intelligenter systeme. Archiv des Offentlichen Rechts 143(1):1—66

Witten IH, Frank E, Hall MA, Pal CJ (2016) Data mining: practical machine learning tools and tech-
niques. Morgan Kaufmann, Burlington

Zech JR, Badgeley MA, Liu M, Costa AB, Titano JJ, Oermann EK (2018) Variable generalization perfor-
mance of a deep learning model to detect pneumonia in chest radiographs: a cross-sectional study.
PLoS Med 15(11):e1002683

Zuo Z, Loster M, Krestel R, Naumann F (2017) Uncovering business relationships: context-sensitive rela-
tionship extraction for difficult relationship types. In: Proceedings of the conference Lernen, Wis-
sen, Daten, Analysen (LWDA), vol 1917, pp 271-283

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published
maps and institutional affiliations.

Q) Springer
