 

www.nature.com/scientificdata

SCIENTIFIC DATA:

OPEN :

DATA DESCRIPTOR |

The SUSTech-SYSU dataset for
automatically segmenting and
classifying corneal ulcers

Lijie Deng??, Junyan Lyu*?, Haixiang Huang’, Yuqing Deng’, Jin Yuan? & Xiaoying Tang”

Corneal ulcer is acommon ophthalmic symptom. Segmentation algorithms are needed to identify
and quantify corneal ulcers from ocular staining images. Developments of such algorithms have been
obstructed by a lack of high quality datasets (the ocular staining images and the corresponding gold-
standard ulcer segmentation labels), especially for supervised learning based segmentation algorithms.
In such context, we prepare a dataset containing 712 ocular staining images and the associated
segmentation labels of flaky corneal ulcers. In addition to segmentation labels for flaky corneal ulcers,
we also provide each image with three-fold class labels: firstly, each image has a label in terms of its
general ulcer pattern; secondly, each image has a label in terms of its specific ulcer pattern; thirdly,
each image has a label indicating its ulcer severity degree. This dataset not only provides an excellent
opportunity for investigating the accuracy and reliability of different segmentation and classification
algorithms for corneal ulcers, but also advances the development of new supervised learning based
algorithms especially those in the deep learning framework.

Background & Summary

Corneal ulcer is the most frequently-occurred symptom in corneal diseases'. A corneal ulcer is an inflammatory
or more seriously, infective condition of the cornea involving disruptions of its epithelial layer or the corneal
stroma~’. Corneal ulcers may be the consequences of contact lens, trauma, adnexal diseases, topical steroid uses,
severe debilitation and ocular surface disorders and may result in corneal scarring, perforation, endophthalmitis,
and decreased vision. Late or inappropriate treatment may induce irreversible damages to the human eyes*”.
Corneal ulcers have been significantly affecting the human eye health.

Fluorescein is the most widely used diagnostic dye in optometry and ophthalmology for assessing the integ-
rity of the ocular surface and particularly the integrity of the cornea®’. In many ophthalmologic examinations,
corneal staining is one of the most commonly used methods for diagnosing corneal ulcers. Advances in staining
techniques have allowed researchers to diagnose and analyze corneal ulcers together with a slitlamp microscopy.
More importantly, the fluorescein staining imaging technique provides a great opportunity for quantitative anal-

yses of corneal ulcers.

: variability. During the past decade, various semi-

To quantify the severity of a corneal ulcer, its segmentation is desired, especially for flaky ulcers. Manual seg-
mentation is considered as being the most reliable but highly time-consuming and of large inter- and intra-rater
$10 and fully-automated'''* techniques have been developed for
segmenting corneal ulcers. Many of these segmentation algorithms employ machine learning techniques which
require large training datasets. A training sample for image segmentation has two components: (1) the image
used for segmentation; (2) the associated ground truth segmentation label. The size and diversity of the training
dataset usually have significant influences on the performance of a machine learning based segmentation algo-
rithm®'°. In the field of medical image segmentation, developing high-quality and large training datasets has
become a very important research topic. For example, the LPBA40 dataset was created for the development of
automated segmentation algorithms of 56 brain regions from structural magnetic resonance (MR) images!®’’.
A publicly accessible dataset on white matter hyper-intensity segmentation, from T1-weighted and FLAIR MR
images, has been created and used in a MICCAI segmentation challenge'®. The ATLAS dataset was established for

‘Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen,
China. *State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou,
China. These authors contributed equally: Lijie Deng and Junyan Lyu. *email: yuanjincornea@126.com; tangxy@
sustech.edu.cn

 

SCIENTIFIC DATA | (2020) 7:23 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0360-7 1
www.nature.com/scientificdata/

 

developing automated algorithms for segmenting brain stroke lesions from structural MR images’’. The IDRiD
dataset was created to incite automated lesion detection algorithms from color fundus images with signs of dia-
betic retinopathy’’. And the DRIVE database was established to advance automated segmentation algorithms of
blood vessels from retinal images*’. However, so far, there has been no publicly available training dataset that can
be used for supervised learning based segmentations of corneal ulcers. In addition, to quantitatively compare the
performance of different segmentation algorithms of corneal ulcers, it is of great importance to have an evaluation
dataset with the ground truth segmentation labels being available.

In such context, we prepare a large corneal ulcer dataset, including ocular staining images and the correspond-
ing segmentation labels of flaky corneal ulcers. In addition to flaky segmentation labels, we also provide each
image with three-fold class labels: firstly, each image has a label in terms of its general ulcer pattern; secondly, each
image has a label in terms of its specific ulcer pattern; thirdly, each image has a label indicating its ulcer severity
degree. In terms of the general ulcer pattern, this dataset includes three categories respectively corresponding
to point-like corneal ulcers, point-flaky mixed corneal ulcers and flaky corneal ulcers. Please note, the ground
truth segmentation labels are exclusive to point-flaky and flaky corneal ulcers but not for point-like ones. In
terms of the specific ulcer pattern and the severity degree, this dataset can be divided into both five categories
respectively corresponding to five specific types of ulcer patterns and five grades of ulcer severity according to
specific type-and-grading (TG) classification standards”. As such, this dataset is not only useful for developing
and evaluating automated corneal ulcer segmentation algorithms but also beneficial for inventing and validating
classification algorithms for identifying the general and specific ulcer patterns as well as the ulcer severity degree.
A TG identification of a corneal ulcer utilizing a fluorescein staining image plays an important role in establishing
individualized drug or surgical intervention strategies. It is a premise and basis for precisely treating various ocu-
lar surface diseases. This dataset can also be used as objective and quantitative indicators for evaluating different
types of treatments and tracking their efficacy.

Methods

Data collection. A total of 712 fluorescein staining images capturing the ocular surfaces were collected
from patients of various corneal ulcer degrees at the Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center at Sun Yat-sen University.
There were no selection criteria on age, sex, ulcer severity, nor ulcer cause. Informed consent was obtained from
each patient. The study protocol was approved by a properly constituted institutional review board (Zhongshan
Ophthalmic Centre ethics committee of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China), and the study was con-
ducted in accordance with the ethical principles of the Declaration of Helsinki (2017KYPJ104).

The specific process of obtaining each fluorescein staining image is as follows: Staining was evaluated after a
fluorescein-impregnated strip got wet with a single drop of sterile saline, and any excessive fluid was shaken off
when the drop saturated the impregnated tip of both eyes of each patient. And then, the patient was asked to blink
several times to ensure proper mixing of the fluorescein dye throughout the tear film. No rinsing step was used.
Because the residence time is known to influence fluorescence, all images were taken 3-5 minutes after fluorescein
instillation. At the slit lamp, clinical grading of the staining was conducted for all corneal regions. For the purpose
of this study, we focused on the cornea area but not the conjunctival areas, given that the cornea area is the region
that is most commonly and highly stained in corneal epithelial lesions.

We used slit-beam lighting with the maximum width (30 mm) of the white light source, a blue excitation filter,
a 10 or 16 magnification, and a diffusion lens at a 10 to 308 oblique angle, with the light source sitting at the mid-
point between the pupil margin and limbus. An automated digital camera system was used to set the aperture,
exposure time, and shutter speed based on the luminance of the examination room. The images were obtained
using a Haag-Streit BM 900 slit-lamp microscope (Haag Streit AG, Bern, Switzerland) in combination with a
Canon EOS 20D digital camera (Canon, Tokyo, Japan). Images were saved in JPG format in 24-bit RGB color with
a resolution of 2592 x 1728 pixels. Each image contained only one cornea, which was fully presented in the image
and approximately centred in the visual field.

Image Categorization. Three categories in terms of each ulcer’s general pattern. According to the shape
and distribution characteristics of the corneal ulcers, they can be classified into three categories respectively cor-
responding to point-like corneal ulcers, point-flaky mixed corneal ulcers and flaky corneal ulcers. A point-like
corneal ulcer indicates the presence of a corneal disease that is the most common and relatively mild. Point-like
corneal ulcers typically manifest at an early stage of an ophthalmic inflammation or when the corneal ulcers are
almost cured. This type of corneal ulcers usually has the pattern of a concentration of numerous small ulcer dots
and can be distributed anywhere within the cornea, and they will typically recover after appropriate and effective
treatments”. A flaky corneal ulcer indicates the presence of a most serious corneal disease, and the ulcer area gen-
erally has bright green color with clear boundaries. A flaky corneal ulcer may induce scars of varying thicknesses
on the ocular surface, which will significantly affect the patient’s vision, and may even induce a loss of vision**. A
point-flaky mixed corneal ulcer is irregularly distributed, containing both point-like and flaky ulcers within the
cornea. A point-flaky mixed corneal ulcer usually indicates the presence of a corneal disease the severity degree
of which lies between the aforementioned two types.

Clinically, doctors or physicians need to adopt different treating and curring strategies for the aforemen-
tioned three categories of corneal ulcers. Therefore, correctly discriminating those three categories is of great
clinical importance. Three experienced ophthalmologists from the Zhongshan Ophthalmic Centre at Sun Yat-sen
University, who were responsible for ophthalmic research and clinical work, classified each image into the afore-
mentioned three categories. Two ophthalmologists independently classified each ocular staining image, and a
third ophthalmologist re-classified the images with inconsistent classification results from the previous two oph-
thalmologists. The entire dataset was distributed as follows: 358 images were labeled as having point-like corneal

 

SCIENTIFIC DATA | (2020) 7:23 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0360-7 2
 

Demonstration of the three types of corneal ulcers in terms of their general patterns, with the top row
representing point-like corneal ulcers, the middle row representing point-flaky mixed corneal ulcers and the
bottom row representing flaky corneal ulcers.

type0 type2 type3

    

Demonstration of representative images corresponding to each of the five types in TG grading.

ulcers, 263 images were labeled as having point-flaky mixed corneal ulcers and the other 91 were labeled as having
flaky corneal ulcers. Representative cases of those three types are demonstrated in Fig.

TG grading categories. The TG grading is a common staining grading method that has been worldwidely
used. The TG grading method has two components: one is to classify each image according to the corneal ulcer’s
specific pattern (Type grading), and the other is to classify each image according to the corneal ulcer’s severity
degree (Grade grading)**. These two grading criteria are also important bases for a determination of subsequent
treating plans.

(1) Type grading: There are different types of corneal ulcers in terms of their specific patterns, and a judgment
of the specific type is usually the first step for doctors to diagnose the potential underlying disease. The specific
type also has an important impact on the corresponding treatment plan. We divided all images into 5 categories
(type0-type4) according to the Type grading criteria**, as shown in Fig. 2. To be specific,

e type0: No ulcer of the corneal epithelium;
e typel: Micro punctate;

e type2: Macro punctate;

e type3: Coalescent macro punctate;

e type4: Patch (>=1 mm).

 

(2020) 7:23 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0360-7
www.nature.com/scientificdata/

 

Number of images | 36 98 203 273 102

 

Grade grading gradeO | gradel | grade2 | grade3 | grade4
Number of images _ | 36 78 40 10 548

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 1. The number of images belonging to each category in the TG grading.

(2) Grade grading: The severity degree of a corneal ulcer is closely related to its location in the cornea. The pupil
has a small circle shape located at the center of the cornea, which is the passage of light into the eye”. There are
significant influences on vision when epithelium at the pupil is damaged. When ulcer occurs at the pupil area,
the ulcer secretion material directly blocks the entry of light and affects vision. There may be situations where
ulcers spread during a treatment, which may indicate that the corneal infection is aggravated. And it suggests
that the current medical treatment cannot inhibit the growth of microorganisms and the treatment plan should
be changed immediately. The position information of a corneal ulcer provides a reference for doctors to make
treatment decisions.

The corneal surface can be divided into five quadrants based on our previously-proposed elliptical model
used for corneal extraction’®. The area where the pupil is located at is set to be the first quadrant, which is called
the central optical zone of the cornea. The central optical zone is a circle located at the center of the cornea, and
its radius is usually one-third of the axis of the ellipse contouring the cornea. The remaining four quadrants are
evenly distributed in the ring area in a 90° fan shape**. Each image was graded according to the following crite-
ria’, as shown in Fig. 3. To be specific,

e grade0: No ulcer of the corneal epithelium;

e gradel: Corneal ulcers involve only one surrounding quadrant;

e grade2: Corneal ulcers involve two surrounding quadrants;

e grade3: Corneal ulcers involve three or four surrounding quadrants;
e grade4: Corneal ulcers involve the central optical zone of the cornea.

Overall, most of our ocular staining images lie in the categories of type2 and type3. The specific distributions
are: 36 images for type0, 98 images for typel, 203 images for type2, 273 image for type3, and 102 images for type4.
In terms of the five grades, more than half of our ocular staining images lie in the category of grade5. The specific
distributions are: 36 images for grade0, 78 images for gradel1, 40 images for grade2, 10 image for grade3, and 548
images for grade4. Table 1 tabulates the numbers of images for each category in the Type grading and the Grade
grading.

Creation of flaky ulcer segmentation labels. For point-like corneal ulcers, it is very challenging to man-
ually delineate the ulcer points. As such, we only prepare the ground truth segmentation labels for flaky ulcers in
both flaky ulcer images and point-flaky mixed ulcer images. We first used an existing semi-automatic approach
to identify the cornea from each image’’. The main ulcer area was then segmented within the cornea by employ-
ing a combination of techniques: 1) identify and modify the color information of reflective areas in the original
fluorescein staining image of interest; 2) iterative k-means based clustering to extract areas with similar color
information; 3) morphological operations to polish results from the previous step, with the parameters employed
in the morphological operators determined automatically via linear regression analyses. Detailed information of

 

SCIENTIFIC DATA | (2020) 7:23 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0360-7 4
www.nature.com/scientificdata/

 

result1
result5

result9

 

NN
> a >
b

The Original Image Extracted Corneal Area Reflective Area Processing

result2

result6

result7 result8
result10 result11 result12

result3 result4

 

142 Potential Ulcer Labels Morphological Operations Segmentation Based on k-means

 

Manual Correction The Final Result

Fig. 4 Demonstration of the flowchart of creating the ground truth segmentation labels of flaky corneal ulcers.
The red outline in “The Final Result” indicates the boundary of the cornea, and the black outline indicates the
boundary of the corneal ulcer.

Cee eee eee rere cer eeeeeeecerr eres eres eeeseeeeeeeeesreeeseeeeee ees eeeeeeeeEeeeeeeeeeErEeeEeeeeEeEe ee eee oe eee EEE HE EEE EEE HHH EEE EEE HHO EEE OEE EEO OEE

each step can be found in our previous works'°”®. After extracting the main ulcer area, to provide more candidates
for the subsequent manual correction, we created another 11 potential ulcer labels, as shown in Fig. 4.

In Fig. 4, resultl denotes the cornea with the reflective area having been processed. Result2 was obtained
by removing specific pixels from result1l. To be specific, pixels having the following RGB intensity ranges:
52<R< 255, 37 < G< 255, 240 < B< 255 (approaching white), 150 << R< 255, 150< G< 255, 150<B< 255
(approaching pure blue), or 0< R<255,0<G< 10, 0<B< 10 (approaching red) have been removed from
result1 to yield result2. Those thresholding upper and lower bounds were identified based on empirical experi-
ments. Result3 denotes the aforementioned segmentation result of the main ulcer area. After that, we removed
result3 from result2 followed by a RGB-to-HSV conversion in terms of the pixel-wise color intensities”’. We then
calculated the average value of the H-channel and used it as an equal-point to divide all pixels into two piles. Each
pile of pixels was then divided into another two piles in the same way until all pixels have been divided into eight
non-overlapping piles. The average values of the H-channel of these eight piles had an monotonic increasing
pattern. The pixels of these eight piles were sequentially added to result3 to respectively form the potential ulcer
labels from result4 to result11. The reason why we created eight thresholding ranges is because that corneal ulcers
typically have very different intensity ranges, varying from image to image. A single threshold would not work
for all images. Result12 denotes the result after removing the pixels with intensity values lying in the range of
0<H<0.544,0<S<1,0<V<1 from result2”.

From the 12 potential ulcer labels, we manually selected the most accurate one, the one with the most com-
plete ulcer area and the least background area. Please note, the result may still be not sufficiently accurate even
after going through all aforementioned steps. For certain cases, based on ophthalmologists’ visual examinations,
we performed manual corrections to obtain the final segmentation results of the flaky corneal ulcer labels. All the
aforementioned steps are illustrated in Fig. 4.

Data Records

This dataset is publicly available at (https://github.com/CRazorback/The-SUSTech-SYSU-dataset-for-automatically-
segmenting-and-classifying-corneal-ulcers and https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.4526675), which can
be downloaded as a zip file**. In this zip folder, all the original ocular staining images, the associated cornea
labels, and the associated flaky ulcer segmentation labels (images with point-like corneal ulcers do not have such

 

SCIENTIFIC DATA |

(2020) 7:23 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0360-7 5
www.nature.com/scientificdata/

 

» «

segmentation labels) are provided as three folders, named respectively as “rawImages’, “corneaLabels’, and “ulcer-
Labels”. Results of superimposing cornea and flaky corneal ulcer segmentation masks on the associated ocular
staining images are also provided in the “corneaOverlay” and “ulcerOverlay” folders. In the “rawImages” folder,
files are named as “n.jpg’, with n ranging between 1 and 712 denoting the nth sample. All images in this folder are
saved in the JPG format. The segmentation label images of the cornea and the flaky ulcer area are saved as binary
images in the PNG format, having the same size as the corresponding ocular staining image. An excel file was also
provided, with the first column denoting the sample ID, the second column denoting the general pattern category
(0 to 2, with 0 representing a point-like corneal ulcer, 1 representing a point-flaky mixed corneal ulcer, and 2
representing a flaky corneal ulcer), the third column denoting the type grading (0 to 4), and the fourth column
denoting the grade grading (0 to 4). Two videos respectively demonstrating the semi-automatic segmentation
process and the subsequent manual correction process were also provided in the zip folder.

Technical Validation

All the segmentation labels of the 354 images with flaky corneal ulcers (263 images with point-flaky mixed cor-
neal ulcers and 91 images with flaky corneal ulcers) have been visually reviewed independently by two ophthal-
mologists to ensure accuracy. It is worth being pointed out that among all those 354 images there are 100 images
the flaky ulcer segmentation labels of which were created in a fully-manual way. Those 100 images had already
been used in one of our previous works”°.

The quality of all the 712 fluorescein staining images used in this study has been visually examined by expe-
rienced ophthalmologists to ensure sufficient image quality. A potential limitation of this work is that we did not
provide any quantitative metrics to validate the quality of each image. A viable approach is to manually score the
quality of each image, as proposed elsewhere”, which may also inaugurate deep learning approaches for automat-
ically scoring the quality of fluorescein staining images.

The segmentation label of each image was provided in a binary format, even though the consensus was arrived
by 3 independent annotators. A potential better way is to provide a probabilistic segmentation label, similar to
what has been done for the DiaretDB1 dataset*’. Recently, uncertainty has been paid great attention to in medical
related deep learning tasks. There are two major types of uncertainty. Aleatoric uncertainty accounts for noises
in the data, often induced during the data acquisition process. Epistemic uncertainty relates to uncertainty in the
model parameters, usually arising from the limited size of datasets*'. In this study, our sophisticated data acqui-
sition procedure has reduced the aleatoric uncertainty to a relatively low extent, as verified by visual assessments.
Multiple annotations in a probabilistic setting may help calibrate the estimation of aleatoric uncertainty’, which
will be one of our future endeavors.

The dataset provided in this work has a relatively large sample size in terms of medical image segmentation
tasks (a total of 354 samples), as compared to a sample size of 81 in the IDRiD dataset’ and a sample size of 40
in the DRIVE dataset”!. However, in terms of TG classifications, this dataset is largely unbalanced and has a rela-
tively limited sample size for certain categories, which may cause overfitting problems if used in a deep learning
setting. In this context, this dataset may better suit “small dataset” regimes in terms of developing automated
classification algorithms, the research topic of which has already been extensively investigated*’. One of our future
research efforts is to collect more data to address this limitation.

Usage Notes
‘The dataset presented in this paper can be downloaded through the link mentioned before. Users of this dataset
should acknowledge the contributions of the original authors and properly cite this article.

Received: 3 July 2019; Accepted: 11 December 2019;
Published online: 20 January 2020

References
1. Song, X. et al. A multi-center, cross-sectional study on the burden of infectious keratitis in China. PloS One 9, 12 (2014).
2. Chen, J. Q. & Yuan, J. Strengthen the study of the ocular surface recon struction. Zhonghua yan ke za zhi (Chinese journal of
ophthalmology) 46, 3 (2010).
3. Bron, A. J., Janine, A. & Calonge, M. Methodologies to diagnose and monitor dry eye disease: report of the Diagnostic Methodology
Subcommittee of the International Dry Eye WorkShop. Ocul. Surf. 5, 108 (2007).
4, Diamond, J. et al. Corneal biopsy with tissue micro homogenisation for isolation of organisms in bacterial keratitis. Eye 13, 545
(1999).
5. Cohen, E. J., Laibson, P. R., Arentsen, J. J. & Clemons, C. S. Corneal ulcers associated with cosmetic extended wear soft contact
lenses. Ophthalmology. 94, 109 (1987).
6. Morgan, P. B. & Carole, M. C. Corneal staining: Do we really understand what we are seeing. Contact Lens Anterio. 32, 48-54 (2009).
7. Zhang, Y., Chen, P., Di, G., Qi, X. & Gao, H. Netrin-1 promotes dia betic corneal wound healing through molecular mechanisms
mediated via the adenosine 2b receptor. Sci. Rep. 8, 1 (2018).
8. Sun, Q., Deng, L., Liu, J., Yuan, J. & Tang, X. Patch-based deep convo lutional neural network for corneal ulcer area segmentation.
OMIA 2017: Fetal, Infant and Ophthalmic Medical Image Analysis 101-108 (2017).
9. Wolffsohn, J. S. & Purslow, C. Clinical monitoring of ocular physiology using digital image analysis. Contact Lens Anterio. 26, 27-35
(2003).
10. Deng, L., Huang, H., Yuan, J. & Tang, X. Automatic segmentation of corneal ulcer area based on ocular staining images. SPIE
Medical Imag ing 2018: Biomedical Applications in Molecular, Structural, and Functional Imaging (2018).
11. Rodriguez, J. D. et al. Automated grading system for evaluation of corneal superficial punctate keratitis associated with dry eye.
Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 56, 4 (2015).
12. Peterson, R. C. & Wolffsohn, J. S. Objective grading of the anterior eye. Optom. vis. sci. 86, 273-8 (2009).
13. Pritchard, N., Young, G. & Coleman, S. Subjective and objective mea sures of corneal staining related to multipurpose care systems.
Contact Lens Anterio. 26, 3-9 (2003).
14. Chun, Y. S., Yoon, W. B., Kim, K. G. & Park, I. K. Objective assessment of corneal staining using digital image analysis. Invest.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 55, 12 (2014).

 

SCIENTIFICDATA| (2020) 7:23 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0360-7 6
www.nature.com/scientificdata/

 

15. Sanchez, C. I. & Garcia, M. A. Retinal image analysis based on mixture models to detect hard exudates. Med. Image Anal. 13,
650-658 (2009).

16. Shattuck, D. et al. Construction of a 3d probabilistic atlas of human cortical structures. Neuroimage 39, 1064-1080 (2008).

17. Klein, A. et al. Evaluation of 14 nonlinear deformation algorithms applied to human brain mri registration. Neuroimage 46, 786-802
(2009).

18. Wardlaw, J. M. et al. Neuroimaging standards for research into small vessel disease and its contribution to ageing and
neurodegeneration. Lancet Neurol. 12, 822-838 (2013).

19. Liew, S. L. et al. A large, open source dataset of stroke anatomical brain images and manual lesion segmentations. Sci. Data 5, 180011
(2018).

20. Porwal, P. et al. Indian diabetic retinopathy image dataset (IDRiD): a database for diabetic retinopathy screening research. Data 3,
25 (2018).

21. Staal, J., Abramoff, M. D., Niemeijer, M. & Viergever, M. A. Ridge based vessel segmentation in color images of the retina. IEEE
Trans. Med. Imaging 23, 501-509 (2004).

22. Liu, Z. G. Dry eye diagnosis. [Zhonghua yan ke za zhi] Chinese journal of ophthalmology 38, 318-320 (2002).

23. Deswal, J., Arya, S. K., Raj, A. & Bhatti, A. A case of bilateral corneal perforation in a patient with severe dry eye. J. Clin. Diagn. Res.
11, 4 (2017).

24. Peters, M. Corneal ulcer. BMA A-Z Family Medical Encyclopedia. 13, 682-68 (2004).

25. Olive, D. J. The structure and transparency of the cornea. J. Physiol. 136, 263-286 (1957).

26. Deng, L., Huang, H., Yuan, J. & Tang, X. Superpixel Based Automatic Segmentation of Corneal Ulcers from Ocular Staining Images.
IEEE 23" International Conference on Digital Signal Processing (2018).

27. Maurice, D. M. HSV Color Space. Springer US (2008).

28. Yuan, J. et al. The SUSTech-SYSU dataset for automatically segmenting and classifying corneal ulcers. figshare, https://doi.
org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.4526675 (2019).

29. Fu, H. et al. Evaluation of Retinal Image Quality Assessment Networks in Different Color-spaces. International Conference on
Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (2019).

30. Kauppi, T. et al. The diaretdb1 diabetic retinopathy database and evalu ation protocol. BMVC (2007).

31. Kendall, A. & Gal, Y. What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep learning for computer vision?. Advances in neural information
processing systems (2017).

32. Hu, S. et al. Supervised uncertainty quantification for segmentation with multiple annotations. International Conference on Medical
Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (2019).

33. Zhang, Z. et al. Origa-light: An online retinal fundus image database for glaucoma analysis and research. 2010 Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology (2010).

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFC0112404) and the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (81501546).

Author contributions

J.Y., H.H. and Y.D. conducted data collection, data quality control, manual correction of flaky ulcer segmentation
labels, as well as image classifications into the three ulcer general pattern categories, the five type categories, and
the five grade categories. L.D. and J.L. conducted semi-automatic label creations for flaky corneal ulcers, visual
examinations of the ulcer labels, and technical validation analyses. X.T. contributed to the design of the entire
work. All authors have contributed to writing the manuscript.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.Y. or X.T.

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International

License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/
applies to the metadata files associated with this article.

© The Author(s) 2020

 

SCIENTIFIC DATA | (2020) 7:23 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0360-7 7
