Visual Informatics 4 (2020) 11-22

 

 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Visual Informatics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/visinf

a
ra. 8

averse
Informatics

 

 

Hermes: Guidance-enriched Visual Analytics for economic network

exploration

Roger A. Leite*”, Alessio Arleo ’, Johannes Sorger”, Theresia Gschwandtner‘°,

Silvia Miksch?

* Vienna University of Technology - TU Wien, Austria
> Complexity Science Hub Vienna, Austria

 

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

 

Article history:

Received 27 August 2020

Received in revised form 28 September 2020
Accepted 29 September 2020

Available online 6 October 2020

 

Keywords:

Data visualization
Economics

Network exploration
Supply chain

The economy of a country can be modeled as a complex system in which several players buy and sell
goods from each other. By analyzing the investment flows, it is possible to reconstruct the supply chain
for the production of most goods, whose understanding is important to analysts and public officials
interested in creating and evaluating strategies for informed and strategic decision making, for instance,
adjusting tax policies. Those networks of players and investments, however, tend to be complex and
very dense, which leads to over-plotted visualizations that obfuscate precious information such as the
dependencies between productive sectors and regions. In this paper, we propose Hermes, a guidance-
enriched Visual Analytics environment (named after the Greek God of Commerce) for the exploration
of complex economic networks, to uncover supply chains, regions’ productivity, and sector-to-sector
relationships. With practical knowledge regarding guidance, we designed and implemented a visual
sub-graph querying approach to extract patterns from such complex investment graphs obtained from
real-world data.

We present a three-fold evaluation of the system: we perform a qualitative evaluation of our
approach with three domain experts, a separate assessment of the proposed guidance features with
an expert researcher in this field, and a case study of Hermes using a bank account network dataset
to demonstrate the generalizability of our approach.

© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Zhejiang University and Zhejiang University

1. Introduction

Understanding the behavior of the players in an economic
network is a challenging and profitable problem. The obtained
knowledge could be used to maintain a sustainable environment
to support the country’s growth. For example, understanding how
in a country productive sectors and regions are related allows
the government to plan strategic policies that support positive
economic trends. Typical tasks involve looking for weak/strong
connections, supply dependencies, or growing and shrinking in-
vestment trends. While Artificial Intelligence (AI) is very useful
to detect known patterns as well as expected and non-expected
outliers, when it comes to reasoning and exploration of a data
set, a Visual Analytics (VA) tool works as a brush to an artist.
By coupling computational power with the power of the human

* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: roger.leite@tuwien.ac.at (R. A. Leite),
alessio.arleo@tuwien.ac.at (A. Arleo), sorger@csh.ac.at (J. Sorger),
theresia.gschwandtner@tuwien.ac.at (T. Gschwandtner),
silvia.miksch@tuwien.ac.at (S. Miksch).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.visinf.2020.09.006

Press Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http: //creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

visual system, we enable domain experts to derive insights which
would not be possible with other approaches.

In this work, we focus on the problem of exploring country-
wide complex financial networks, aiming at unveiling invest-
ment networks, supply chains, and economical links between
productive sectors and geographical regions. We present Hermes,
a VA exploration environment for the exploration of economic
networks featuring time-oriented and multivariate data. Our
system is composed of an “Overview” board to provide a high
level analysis of the available data and a “Network” board for
details on demand. In the latter we propose a visual approach
for the definition of patterns to be searched within the network
that can be defined by creating and combining “profiles”, that are
groups of nodes that comply to a set of user-defined constraints.
We also include guidance-enriched (Ceneda et al., 2017, 2019)
components to aid the users in the definition of queries and
profiles, to enable a fully interactive visual approach to profile
creation, pattern drawing, and pattern matching. Therefore, our
main contributions are:

2468-502X/© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Zhejiang University and Zhejiang University Press Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under

the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
R. A. Leite, A. Arleo, J. Sorger et al.

e We designed a visual support for the definition of desig-
nated profiles, which can summarize multiple node types
and facilitate a compact construction of query subgraphs.

e We integrated a guidance-enriched visual subgraph
querying approach that aids the analyst in building sub-
graph queries from the overabundance of possible node and
edge combinations.

e We conducted a three-fold evaluation: (1) a task-based
qualitative user study with three domain experts collecting
insights and guidance update rate measurements, (2) the
assessment of our guidance design by an expert in guidance
methods for VA, and (3) a use case description demon-
strating the generalizability and applicability of Hermes to
a second domain.

2. Related work

Hermes can be framed as a VA approach for the analysis of eco-
nomic networks using a visual language to perform graph queries
with guidance elements. Therefore, we describe the related work
by grouping in four categories.

VA for Financial Domain: Visualization proved to be prolific
in the financial domain. FinanceVis (Dumas et al., 2014) presents
a survey involving over 50 research articles, totaling over 70 dif-
ferent techniques, related to the presentation and visualization of
financial data. It also features an online collection of the surveyed
papers for easy access. The paper concludes that visualization
could empower analysts in the financial domain, and encour-
ages further collaboration. Ko et al. (2016) focused on gathering
expert feedback and opinions on existing VA approaches in fi-
nance. Interviews were also targeted at understanding possible
improvements and preferences about visual abstractions, inter-
action methods, automated techniques, and data sources. When
designing Hermes, we drew inspiration from the several visual-
ization approaches in the financial domain Dumas et al. (2014),
and from the strong motivation and appeal for more real-world
based solutions (Ko et al., 2016).

Network Analysis in Finance: To enable the VA process on
financial networks, graph drawing and visualization played a
major role, with node-link representations being often used as an
intuitive way to present such networks to the users. Allen and
Babus (2009) argue that node-link graph diagrams are a natural
solution for the representation of financial systems and effi-
ciently explain certain economic phenomena such as resources
exchange. This directly supports part of our approach design
choices. TekuSova and Kohlhammer (2008) visually supports
the users in understanding complex shareholding networks. It
incorporates different economic metrics and supports the iden-
tification of ultimate shareholders. The identification of network
players is a common ground of this work and Hermes (see Sec-
tion 3.3): R4. VisFAN (Didimo et al., 2011) deals with the obser-
vation financial transactions between entities to identify money
laundering patterns and potential frauds. The system also allows
to cluster and aggregate elements for bottom-up exploration with
both automatic and manual clustering techniques. Different from
this paper, Hermes can group elements by the profile creation
feature (see Section 4.3.2: A). Huang et al. (2009) present an
event monitoring approach for stock markets security. It features
a linked-views approach with node-link diagrams for network
analysis and a 3D treemap for market performance visualization.
The main goal of this approach is to identify the attackers (the
sources of the fraud), and further attack plans, while reducing the
amount of false-positives generated by AI techniques.

Origraph (Bigelow et al., 2019) supports network data cre-
ation, reshaping, and filtering. The tool allows the user to execute
these operations with little to no programming according to the

12

Visual Informatics 4 (2020) 11-22

level of details required by the task. In Hermes, we were inspired
by this work to provide for users with a non-programming ap-
proach to generate queries. Differently from Origraph, however,
Hermes allows to aggregate filters together, to generate profiles
that fulfill different constraints. Fujiwara et al. (2018) presented
a solution to automatically compose a network visual summary
based on a rank model (V2D2) and a reduction algorithm. The
rank model orders the importance of interactions and provides
dependencies among them. Even lacking user studies, the pro-
posal automatic approach proved to be efficient for preparing
large networks for analysis. Focused on non-expert users, Van
den Elzen and Van Wijk (2014) navigates from network detail
to overview by network elements selection and aggregation. In
Hermes, we follow a similar approach, providing users with dif-
ferent boards that provide different perspectives of the data.
As a limitation, they claim to present visual clutter issues with
large selections (above 10) due to its clustering or community
detection algorithms.

Graphical Queries on Graphs: A typical task in the analysis
of financial network is to search for pre-defined patterns and
subgraphs, to highlight some transfers and behaviors of interest
(e.g., money laundering, tax evasion, supply chain management).
To allow users to easily define these patterns, research on VA for
finance branched into systems that incorporated visual languages
allowing the definition of patterns and profiles of interest, which
are used to query the original, complex network. An example of
this approach is provided by Didimo et al. (2018). By using an
already established visual language for pattern definition (Didimo
et al., 2015), they design a system for highlighting malicious
transactions between taxpayers (that includes both individuals
and legal entities). Differently from our approach, the system is
designed to operate in an application domain, while we propose
Hermes as a more flexible approach more oriented on investments
rather than individual transactions. Koenig et al. (2010) discuss
about the visualization of graph query search results in attributed
graphs. This means that each node belongs to a specific category
derived by its attributes (e.g., movies, actors, directors). Similarly
to our approach, the users define the patterns by combining
the different node categories (represented as nodes) together.
To display the results, the obtained nodes are mapped to the
user-defined patterns, which helps users to keep their mental
maps. On the other hand, this approach limits the number of
data items that can be shown in the node-link diagram of query
results. The problem of designing a suitable visual query language
for graph datasets was also discussed by Chau et al. in their
GRAPHITE (Chau et al., 2008) system and, in more depth, by
Pienta et al. with their VISAGE (Pienta et al., 2016). Other than
providing a platform and visualization for querying graphs, the
paper introduces a graph “auto-complete” feature to aid the user
to construct and refine queries. This inspired us to include in
Hermes specific features to assist the users in building the queries.
To do so, we focused on the use of “Guidance”, a relatively
modern field of research that has been recently characterized for
VA (Ceneda et al., 2017).

OntoVis (Shen et al., 2006) allows the analysis of social net-
works by semantic and structural abstraction. It aims at under-
standing who are the main actors and what are the common be-
haviors of a social network. Structural abstraction is achieved by
the topological information such as node degree and connectivity
while semantic abstraction is achieved by filtering nodes that be-
long to the same type. Different from the “profiles” presented by
Hermes, that allows for fine-tuned group filters involving different
numerical and categorical attributes, the semantic abstraction
presented by OntoVis is limited by the existing node types.

Guidance: Guidance has roots in the field of Human Computer
Interaction (HCI) (Horvitz, 1999), but Ceneda et al. (2017) ex-
tended van Wijk’s model of visualization to integrate guidance
R. A. Leite, A. Arleo, J. Sorger et al.

into the VA process. They use existing guidance approaches from
the literature to illustrate the proposed model. Ceneda et al.
(2018a,b) designed and implemented a data-driven guidance tool
to demonstrate that guidance techniques have the potential to
improve data analysis. Most recently, Ceneda et al. (2019) con-
ducted an elaborated literature research to provide an overview
of how guidance is tackled in different approaches. In this work,
the authors highlighted the importance of knowing the actual
state of the analysis. We designed Hermes’ guidance features with
the same “context-awareness” principle.

3. Hermes design context

The main goal of this section is to present the design context of
Hermes, as well as to describe design and implementation choices.

3.1. Data, user, and tasks

We designed and developed our approach based on the design
triangle methodology (Miksch and Aigner, 2014) and Munzner'‘s
nested model (Munzner, 2009), by characterizing the problem at
hand according to the underlying data, the involved users, and
the tasks they have to carry out.

Data. The economic data that our target users analyze can be
separated into two categories: the first one describes aggregate
information, e.g., on national level, that report the monetary in &
out flows between industry sectors within a fiscal year (“IO Ta-
bles” Timmer et al., 2015). A transaction in such a table describes,
for example, the amount of investments (in millions of Euros)
that went from the “Agriculture” sector to the “Manufacturing”
sector. Sectors are encoded according to the ONACE specifica-
tion (ONACE, 2019). The second data category complements the
aggregate information of IO Tables with more granular/regional
details, e.g., on the level of individual firms within a region of a
country. For this category we used the “Sabina” dataset (Wien,
2019): it contains the balance sheets of all the firms in Austria,
including cash flows, locations, branches, and sectors. The com-
bination of both datasets (see Section 4.1) creates the Exchange
Supply Chain (ESC) dataset which was used during the design
and implementation of Hermes. The dataset features 172 nodes
and 20,709 edges.

Users. Hermes target users are financial and economical ex-
perts involved in the development of regional policies and in-
vestment plans, for instance in order to economically revitalize a
region. Users are expected to be proficient in statistical evaluation
of tabular data, but are not expected to have any experience in
visual analysis or network analysis.

Tasks. The task that Hermes aims at supporting, is to improve
the understanding of national economic investment networks
based on the integration of aggregated and granular data. Af-
ter discussing with our domain experts collaborators (not in-
volved on the evaluation), we could identified four sub-tasks:
the exploration of the economic flow network existing between
sectors (T1) and regions (T2), the evaluation of how sectors
relate and impact each region (T3), and supply chain explo-
ration (T4) (e.g., predominantly buying/selling regions). The iden-
tification of these four sub-tasks support us to better understand
the potential of our collaboration with the domain experts.

The combination of the acquired knowledge about data, user,
and tasks support us to define the Research Challenges 3.2.

13

Visual Informatics 4 (2020) 11-22
3.2. Research challenges

In the context of Hermes, we are dealing with several chal-
lenges that result from the underlying data as well as the tasks
that should be enabled on them. Understanding the research
challenges is an important step on the solution design. It is a
broader view of the problem that helps us to plan, measure
efforts, derive more specific requirements (see Section 3.3), and
derive future work suggestion.

Dense Dynamic Networks: Large economic networks are
dense and dynamic, with large and frequent fluctuations. While
automatic approaches can still be used to detect outliers and
confirm known patterns, VA techniques support economic net-
works analysis, as they enable users to interactively drill down
on the dense data with multiple views, improving the exploration
process.

Multi-scale Context: the analysis and exploration of transac-
tions on and across different scales, i.e., regional, national, global,
requires visual and analytical scalable solutions.

Geo-political Context: To better understand transactions, we
need to consider the motivations that guide them. It is known
that geopolitical, geographical, and economical contexts influence
this behavior, e.g., buying from a local or a distant supplier, or the
presence of a quarry or oil field. Considering the ever changing
local and global scenarios, an analysis tool must be flexible in
conveying these different contexts.

Temporal Trends: Economic network analysis involves the ob-
servation of stable behavior over time (e.g., distinguishing grow-
ing regional sectors from shrinking and stable ones). However,
there are many aspects (scale, scope, arrangement, viewpoint)
concerning time-oriented analysis that need to be analyzed ef-
ficiently due to their complex data features (Aigner et al., 2011).

3.3. Requirements

By combining the tasks derived by the problem understand-
ing (see Section 3.1), the broader research challenges context (see
Section 3.2), and with further collaboration of three economists,
we derived four main requirements for our system. The
economists that collaborated during the requirements and the
design development were not participants of the evaluation pre-
sented in Section 5. By defining a set of requirements, we can
also give a better justification for our design choices and provide
a robust framework to design our evaluation.

R1: Overview of region and sector distributions. An eco-
nomic environment is in constant evolution: the transactions
between its major players (the companies) can leave a significant
and lasting impact on the economy of the region they belong to as
well as their foundation and demise. An overview of these aspects
is important to understand the main sectors of an economy and
supports insights such as the most and least prominent sectors
among different regions.

R2: Multi-Scale network exploration. Economists have to
understand the national investment and supply chain network
to better argue about possible investments, propose tax remod-
ulations, and other types of economic policies. The system must
enable network exploration on the different levels of detail on
which the information is available. Moreover, the system must
implement filter techniques to support the exploration of such a
dense network.

R3: Managing queries. During network exploration, analysts
regard different aspects of the data by adjusting various filter
settings. Often it is necessary to compare and cross-reference the
results of such queries. A competent system must thus support
the creation, visualization, and comparison of such query profiles.

R4: Identification and tracking of monetary flows. Under-
standing the monetary flows between sectors and regions could
R. A. Leite, A. Arleo, J. Sorger et al.

give a Significant advantage in many scenarios, including invest-
ment planning, supply chain exploration, and fraud detection. The
system should support the users in the identification and tracking
of the flows in the transactions network, uncovering paths and
patterns pertinent to the application domain.

4. Hermes Design and implementation

We designed several prototypes that we used to explore the
design space in terms of visualization approaches and inter-
actions methods. During different phases of the project devel-
opment, the prototypes were inspected and evaluated by our
three economists collaborators that supported the requirements
definition (see Section 3.3). Our approach was developed using
web technology (HTML, CSS, Javascript), as well as frameworks,
services, and libraries such as Angular, JQuery, and D3.js. A sketch
of the system architecture can be seen in Fig. 1.

4.1. Data model

Hermes data model is represented as a network, whose nodes,
called View Nodes, represent a productive sector of a specific re-
gion (e.g., “Agriculture” in region “Vorarlberg”). Nodes also have
attributes, including cash income flow, outcome flow, and growth
rate. We obtain the growth rate by calculating the difference of
the cashflow (income flow + outcome flow) between the current
year (y) and the last year (y-1). Nodes are linked if a financial
connection (e.g., investment) exists. We obtain this model from
our data sources (see Section 3) as follows: based on the data
combination described by Fritz et al. (2003), we link the details
about national companies (i.e., expenditures, amount of employ-
ees, sectors, locations) to the monetary income and outcome flow
of each productive sector of different regions, enabling us to
estimate how much money was exchanged between the different
sectors and regions. We can, thus, define different profiles to filter
these nodes. A profile is a set of constraints that identifies a subset
of nodes. These constraints might include a group of sectors, a
group of regions, in- and outflow ranges, as well as a growing
rate range.

4.2. Pattern matching algorithm

To create graph patterns, we define and combine specific
profiles. These profiles are represented as profile nodes and the
user can link them using the Network Board (see Section 4.3.2).
Once a pattern has been constructed, we can search for matching
subgraphs in the data model. We define G; = (V;, E;) as our
data model graph (i.e., the target graph) described in Section 4.1,
with V; the vertex set and EF; the set of ordered pairs of nodes
representing the graph edges. We also define |V;| = n. G,
(V,,E,) is the pattern the user constructs with profile nodes
(i.e., the pattern graph). We use our pattern matching algorithm
to look for a subgraph G, = (V, C V;,E, C E;), ie. the result
graph. This algorithm conducts the following operations: since G,
nodes represent profiles, which identify a set of nodes in V,, first
(OP1) for every profile node vu, € V, it extracts the nodes vy; € V;
that match the constraints defined in v, and assign them to V,;
(OP2) for every node now in V,, it checks whether its outgoing
edges belong to E,. An edge e; = (ur, us) € E; belongs to E, if
ur, Up € V; and they were extracted from two different profile
nodes in V, connected by an edge e, € Ep.

It is immediate to show that our algorithm has a quadratic
asymptotic time complexity. OP1 has to be repeated for each
node in V,, therefore has a complexity of O(|V,|). We can perform
OP2 in O(d) time for each node, with d the out-degree of a node
(i.e., the number of outgoing edges). Therefore, considering that

14

Visual Informatics 4 (2020) 11-22

from V, we extract the nodes to insert in V,, the time complexity
of the algorithm is O(|V;|d): |V;| is at most n, when the queried
subgraph includes all the nodes in V;, and d is at most n—1, when
v, Shares an edge with all the other vertices in the graph. There-
fore, the asymptotic complexity is O(n). In practice, we could
find that also with very dense graphs our implementation was
able to provide the requested subgraph in very short time, thus
enabling an interactive exploration (see Section 6). We would like
to remark that even if the general pattern matching problem is
NP-hard, in our case the problem is greatly simplified because the
mapping between the profile nodes and the nodes in the target
graph is already known, since is defined by the user.

4.3. Different boards for different tasks

In this section we describe our design of two combinations
of different visualizations (i.e., “boards”) serving different tasks.
In both boards, we used “Color Brewer” (Harrower and Brewer,
2003) to support distinct color pallets for representing different
regions. The “multiple boards” approach supports “R2: Multi-
Scale network exploration”. Both boards are connected by buttons
that allow the navigation between each other. It is possible to go
from the Overview Board to the Network Board by clicking on
the right bottom button “Go To Investigation Mode”. To go from
the Network Board to the Overview Board, the user can click on
the “Go To Overview Mode” button in the bottom center. Active
filters from one board are carried to the other to keep the same
data investigation context.

4.3.1. Overview board

We designed a fully connected multiple coordinated view
board (see Fig. 2) to provide a good overview of region and sec-
tor distributions (R1) and to support business contextualization.
Views are connected with brushing and linking and filter opera-
tions in one view are reflected in all the other views accordingly.
Besides providing a good overview, this board is designed to
support reasoning about how regions are composed of sectors
and how sectors are represented in the different regions. Next,
we explain our design choices and the possible interactions for
each of the views.

A’: Time Slider. The main goal of the time slider is to select
data from different years for analysis. The user can drag and drop
the slider on any year to load the data of this year.

B’: Connection Matrix. We show a preview of connections
between sectors for the whole country by using an adjacency
matrix. We choose adjacency matrices to visualize a dense net-
work (Ghoniem et al., 2004). Adjacency matrices also have the
advantage that they emphasize an additional variable (i.e., in
our case the amount of money transacted between two sectors)
instead of connections and paths as node-link diagrams do. More-
over when compared to node-link diagrams, adjacency matrices
make better use of the space available and they present less visual
clutter. Each square represents a connection and the shade of
the square encodes the amount of money transacted. Dark areas
in the matrix can be spotted immediately which represent big
quantities of money transacted. We also implemented a mouse
over feature that displays who is the source and target for each
matrix connection square, to make precise information about
connections between nodes (Keller et al., 2006) and amount of
money involved available.

C’: Regions Map. The Austria national map including differ-
ent regions not only works interactively by selecting different
region‘s selectors directly in the map, but also supports the con-
textualization of physically neighboring regions. Therefore, it also
supports presentation purposes.

D’: Parallel Coordinates. Each colored line represents a dif-
ferent region while the axes represent the amount of companies
R. A. Leite, A. Arleo, J. Sorger et al.

  
      
      
 

 
 

Hermes

IO Tables

Sabina

dataset .
Overview

Visual Informatics 4 (2020) 11-22

Pattern matching
algorithm

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

Network

Fig. 1. Hermes workflow. Using the two types of input data (left-hand side) Hermes presents two connected visualization boards (Overview and Network), which

support interactive exploration and insights generations (right-hand side).

©

NiederO

Steiermark

rites Salzburg

Kaernten

G? ON Wee
cae
nage ae we ao% me

0 aot x
S re aK Nad Orat St co Sond
oe er OT yo xe <o°
co Rt a8
Ren-

et se
Ooms ¥

omen ee | ee ee re ee ee eee eee oe i Sweep neaee Batis pee eres

]
Steiermark |
Vorarlberg 4 6x 4 o6x 4 cen 4 96
Salzburg “ve | 7

NiederO

  

os ow

PAM Bon crear
eee SA Ses ae EO

~

 

of a

>" a asi H- 7— ae

“3

s- ote E-V a r Supp

2@ f ©
R - Entertainment B- =
M- = sional = L- Faal wv tate Act 0.3%
6 AS @) d=)
A - Agriculture P - Education
0.3% 0.1%

G- ae ale is =

0. 9

O - Public Adm
0.07%

yw ae

> &

F- a

Ss

1 - Accommodation
0.9%

D - Electricity, Gas
< = 0.3%

é

K - Financial
5.2%

@ f

Q-Human Health T - Households
0.3% 0.03%

Go To Investigation Mode

Fig. 2. Screenshot of Hermes: Overview Board. (A’) Time Slider: allows the selection of different years. (B’) Connection Matrix: gives first impressions about how

intense the sectors are connected on a national level. (C

”) Regions Map: shows the color code and the geographical location of the different national regions. (D’)

Parallel Coordinates: support users to understand how sectors are distributed among regions. (E’) Sectors Donut Charts: shows how regions are distributed among

sectors.

of each sector. To support different overview tasks, it is also
possible to represent other features in the axes such as the total
revenue. With this view it is possible to observe how regions are
composed by sectors and how sectors are distributed between
regions. We opt for using parallel coordinates due to the fact that
it supports the representation of multiple dimensions. The axes
share a common scale to support comparison.

E’: Sectors Donut Charts. A donut chart is essentially a pie
chart without the center area. We used the central area for
plotting the symbol of each sector. Below each chart, we plot
the title of the sector and the percentage that represents the
portion of companies within this sector with respect to the all
companies in the country (in the selected year). While donut
charts should not be used for precise comparisons, we chose them
for two reasons (1) to create an area dedicated to easy sector
overview and selection (comparable with what view Fig. 2: C’)
does for regions and (2) to get an immediate impression of the
main regions a sector is located in. Also, their aspect ratio allows
for the representation of multiple sectors at compact space. In this
view, we distinguish between two sizes of donut charts, smaller
charts represent sectors that had less than one percent of the
national cash flow while bigger charts represents sectors with
more than that. This feature facilitates the task of identifying
the main sectors of the country. It is possible to select values
(sectors and/or regions) from the Overview Board to filter the
data that is available in the Network Board, which implements
the overview + details on demand mantra (Cockburn et al., 2009).

15

4.3.2. Network board

During this subsection we refer to view labels from Fig. 3. The
Network Board is divided into views A, B, and C to support a
three step workflow. In view A, the user creates profiles of sectors
and/or regions with specific income and outcome properties as
well as growing rates. For example, a profile could be “sectors
from Burgenland with a cash income of more than 30 and less
than 100 million Euros”. In view B, these profiles can then be
used as network nodes to construct a network pattern to query
the data. The result of a query is displayed in view C. Views D
and E present different exploration features that support view C.
The workflow presented by the Network Board aims to support
“R3: Managing queries” and “R4: Identification and tracking of
monetary flows”.

A: Profile Creation View. The profile creation view is divided
into two parts: (1) the guidance-enriched sliders to filter in-
come, outcome, and growing rates, and (2) the guidance-enriched
tiles to select regions and sectors. Inspired by the Scented Wid-
get (Willett et al., 2007), the guidance-enriched sliders are de-
signed to increase user familiarity with the data during the profile
creation process. Three sliders are presented: income cash flow,
outcome cash flow, and growth rate. The income and outcome
cash flow dimensions filter how much money a possible sector
or region handles while the growing rate filters the growing (or
shrinking) rates of sectors and regions. Growing rates are derived
by comparing the analyzed year (y) to the previous year (y-1). The
guidance aspects to facilitate informed filtering are described in
Section 4.4. Defined profiles are available in view (B) and can be
selected as a node to construct a network pattern. Unique profile
R. A. Leite, A. Arleo, J. Sorger et al.

 

Regions

 

 

 

 

 

Sectors

 

 

”

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Add Profile Go To Overview Mode

Visual Informatics 4 (2020) 11-22

©)

 

Fig. 3. Screenshot of Hermes: Network Board. (A) Profile Creation View: Profiles created in this view are used to query network patterns in view (B). View (A) is
divided into two parts: (i) guidance-enriched sliders and (ii) region/sector filter selection. (B) Guidance-Enriched Pattern Search: here the user can link together
profiles to create patterns to be matched. The query result is displayed in (C). (D) Control Panel: this panel allows users to regulate some features from view (C).

(E) Dynamic Table: this view shows raw transaction data.

IDs are assigned which contain a unique letter + the amount
of represented regions/sectors. Profile definitions might be very
broad as well as very specific. For instance, a profile which filters
only the income dimension to more than 12 billion Euros will
match three nodes in the data set described in Section 3.1. On
the other hand, if we filter to less than 12 billion Euros, 160 nodes
would match the profile.

B: Pattern Search View. In the Guidance-Enriched Pattern
Search View, we have (1) a list of created profiles on the left and
(2) a drawing canvas on the right. This view allows users to query
for network patterns by selecting profile nodes in (1) and drawing
connections between them in (2). A visual summary of the cre-
ated profiles is shown in (1): a circle filled by the regions’ color (or
gray if multiple regions are involved) and the profile’s ID together
with small symbol representing the intervals of income, outcome,
and growing rate for this profile. The drawing canvas (2) allows
the user visually to recognize the query patterns efficiently (Ware,
2012). It supports various profile connection combinations. The
canvas also allows for interactively deleting and adding profile
nodes and edges as well as changing the direction of edges. Edges
might be uni-directional or bi-directional. The generation of pro-
file nodes allows the user to create a compact representation
of complex constraints, i.e., multiple sectors and regions with
specific characteristics can be combined into one node, which
facilitates the construction of network structures to query for
and improves clarity of these structures. We present the com-
bination of profiles in (2) as a node-link diagram not only to
preserve visual analogy between the constructed pattern and the
network data represented in (C), but also to better support path-
findings tasks (Okoe et al., 2018). Moreover, compared to other
visualization of network data, such as adjacency matrices, node-
link diagrams are better suited to communicate and memorize
network topology and connectivity (Okoe et al. 2018). These
tasks are essential for analyzing economic flow.

C: Node-Link View. We opted for a node-link view instead
of adjacency matrix due to two main design advantages: (1)
it supports visual matching between the pattern drawn by the
user in view B and the query results and (2) it supports bet-
ter reasoning about indirect paths between two nodes (R2 and
R4) (Keller et al., 2006). The compact network pattern created
in view (B) is used to query the data set for sub graphs that

16

match this pattern. The results are then shown in the Node-Link
View. However, this view shows a faithful representation of the
data set without collapsing multiple sectors into one node, as it
is done in view (B) to facilitate pattern construction. Thus, each
node in this view represents a specific sector of a specific region
and edges represent the yearly money flow between them. The
size of nodes is proportional to the amount of money they handle
(income & outcome) while the ring close to the outer border of
the node, indicates the grow rate by representing the size of the
node in the previous year (see Fig. 4). In other words, if the ring
of a node is bigger than the node itself, the amount of money
handled by this sector was decreasing since last year. On the
other hand, if the ring is smaller than the node, this sector has
a growing trend (see Fig. 4). The amount of money exchanged
between sectors is encoded by edge width. To define this width,
we again use a logarithmic scale to avoid extreme visual outliers.
Following Holen and van Wijk’s (Holten and Van Wijk, 2009) rec-
ommendations, we avoided standard arrow representation and,
instead, chose a dark-to-light encoding. The money flows from
the node at the dark side of the edge to the node at the light
side. For bi-direction edges both sides are dark (see leftmost node
in Fig. 3). All nodes and edges can be selected for viewing detail
information in the Dynamic Table View (see view (E)).

D: Control Panel. The control panel was implemented to
facilitate the inspection and refinement of the network presented
in view (C). The first slider allows filtering edges by amount
of money and the second slider allows re-scaling the network
by increasing or decreasing the forces between the nodes. Since
edges directions are represented by a dark-to-light gradient, we
provide the option to invert the background of the node-link
diagram to black, which facilitates the identification of receiver
patterns.

E: Dynamic Table. During our problem analysis together with
experts, we learned that they prefer to rely on detailed infor-
mation presented in a spreadsheet-like representation. While
tables are not suited to provide a good overview of the network
structure, they are good in presenting all the detail information of
specific sectors and regions. Thus, we implemented a dynamic ta-
ble to provide experts with these details on demand. The dynamic
table is populated with information about all edges visible in view
(C). Selecting edges in this table highlights their representations
in view (C).
R. A. Leite, A. Arleo, J. Sorger et al.

 

   

2008
representation

   

stable

decreasing growing

Fig. 4. Visual encoding of the growing rate of a sector. The first row shows
the comparison operation and how it is reflected in the visual encoding of a
sector node. Using this metaphor, we can visually represent shrinking, stable,
and growing sectors (second row).

4.4, Guidance aspects

In this subsection we describe the different degrees and fea-
tures of guidance that are provided by Hermes. Guidance by
itself is a computer-assisted process that continuously reduces
the knowledge gap that may block the data exploration and
analysis. It supports the users to make sense of the data on their
own (Ceneda et al., 2017, 2018a, 2019).

A huge number of profile combinations and constructed net-
work patterns would be feasible, but only a small set of them
make sense for the data at hand. To avoid frustrating trial and
error interaction until a meaningful pattern for querying the data
set could be found, we needed to design Hermes with features
that guide the user in this pattern construction. Hermes includes
four different features aimed at providing guidance to the user,
and thus, facilitating a meaningful and informed usage of the tool.
The following indexes “1, ii, iii” refer to Fig. 3 and “iv” refers to
Fig. 5.

i: Slider Ticks. Sliders in the Profile Creation View are aug-
mented with ticks colored with respect to the different regions
(see Fig. 3: i). One tick represents one sector in one region.
Hovering these ticks makes a tool tip window appear which
shows full textual information about the sector, region, income,
outcome, and growing rate. Ticks are grayed out when they do
not match all defined filters. Thus, this visualization of ticks at
the point of interaction (i.e., the slider) guides the user in making
a meaningful selection of sectors for profile construction, by a
priory avoiding constructions that would not lead to any results
as these constructs cannot be found in the particular data set.
This kind of guidance (i.e., adding information that facilitates the
interaction and selection of the data) meets the guidance degree
of orienting (Ceneda et al., 2017) which is aimed at building
and preserving a user’s mental map (Archambault and Purchase,
2012).

ii: Selection Tiles. The tiles for selecting regions and sectors
work in accordance with the slider filters, for including or ex-
cluding regions and/or sectors from the filtered selection. Options
that, in combination with the other filter settings, do not exist in
the data are grayed out (see Fig. 3: ii). This, again, helps to avoid
the construction of non-existing profiles. Since this feature limits
the users interaction possibilities (i.e, grayed-out tiles cannot
be selected), it corresponds to the guidance degree of directing,
which usually offer the user a pre-selected pool of alternative
next steps for a given task (Ceneda et al., 2017).

iii: Guided Network Pattern Construction. While the two
previous guidance features help the user to define meaningful

17

Visual Informatics 4 (2020) 11-22

profiles, the combination of these profile nodes into a network
pattern that can be found in the data, is also a laborious task if
performed without guidance. Thus, the Pattern Search View (see
Section 4.3.2 (B)) does not allow for the construction of non-
existing patterns. This is achieved in a two-step process: First,
every time the user selects a profile node that is part of the
constructed pattern in the drawing canvas (in Fig. 3: B) in order
to add a connection to another profile node, the system runs
a query that looks for possible connections from this node in
the data set, and disables the selection of all profile nodes that
would lead to empty query results. For example, a given “profile
C’ that would lead to empty query results when connected with
“profile A”. However, it might be possible to connect it with
“profile B”. In Fig. 3: ili, the node D1 is selected in the pattern
drawing canvas and thus, profile C1 is disabled in the list of
available profiles by the system. Again, this feature limits users
in their possibilities to construct arbitrary patterns, which makes
it directing guidance (Ceneda et al., 2017).

iv: Switching to Bipartite Layout. Another design choice that
helps orienting the user (Ceneda et al., 2017), is that the net-
work presentation in the Node-Link View switches to a bipartite
layout (see Fig. 5) every time the user constructs a profile combi-
nation in the Pattern Search View that connects only two profiles.
The automatic adaption of the layout creates an additional aware-
ness in the user that he/she is now investigating a bipartite
graph. While this is obvious from the query pattern constructed
in the pattern canvas, it can be hard to spot in the Node-Link
View which nodes from the query result belong to which profile.
Moreover, the layout facilitates the flow analysis between the two
groups.

5. Evaluation

To assess and evaluate the effectiveness and limitations of
Hermes, we conducted a qualitative user study, in the form of
an interview with three domain experts (P1, P2, P3) (Isenberg
et al., 2013; Kriglstein and Pohl, 2015). We first describe the
user study design (see Section 5.1) followed by the participant
background (see Section 5.2); afterwards we discuss the tasks and
the immediate findings of our study. To complement our study,
we interviewed a research expert in guidance (P4), who discussed
his/her thoughts about the theoretical and practical implications
of the guidance features of Hermes (see Section 5.5). Further-
more, we also did examination of the transferability of Hermes
to Financial Fraud Analysis (FFA) with a domain expert (P5).

5.1. Study design

We conducted our user study as a task-based evaluation: the
objective was to evaluate and observe how users operate Hermes
when asked to solve various tasks. Our study design consists
of individual interviews followed by a hands-on session to be
carried out by up to two participants at a time. Each interview
is structured as follows: (1) participants background interview,
(2) introduction of overview and Network Board, (3) hands-on
testing, (4) task-based evaluation, and (5) final general feedback
discussion. Each session lasted about 90 min. We aimed at making
the users familiar with Hermes before asking them to perform
the task-based evaluation individually and (mostly) unguided.
For the whole duration of the session, participants’ interaction
with Hermes was recorded. They were also asked to think-aloud
in order to follow their reasoning during the evaluation. The
tasks chosen are different for the overview and Network Boards
and were designed to evaluate whether Hermes could fulfill its
design requirements (see Section 3.3). We identified four tasks
per board (see Sections 5.3 and 5.4 ), structured according to the
R. A. Leite, A. Arleo, J. Sorger et al.

Visual Informatics 4 (2020) 11-22

 

Fig. 5. In this picture, we see a bipartite layout result of two profiles. On the left-hand side, the first profile is representing the manufacturing of each region and,
on the right-hand side, the second profile represents the transportation sector of each region. Based on this result, we can investigate how much each manufacturing

region spends with each transportation region.

analytical task taxonomy by Andrienko and Andrienko (2006),
which highlights differences between elementary and synoptic
tasks.

Furthermore, to support insight analysis, we categorize the
obtained user insights by following Klein’s model of intelligence
analysis (Klein, 2013). Our taxonomy includes: Connection in-
sights, obtained by combining data from two or more views;
Coincidence insights, which include relationships between ele-
ments or events that are obscured at first, but that the users can
perceive as connected; Curiosity insights happen when users do
not find information when they expect to, and this pushes them
to find a reason why. Finally, in order to fully comprehend the
impact of our guidance techniques in our study, we implemented
in our prototype a counter that would keep track of how many
times the system updated the interface to guide the users (see
Section 4.4). We called this measurement Guidance Updates. The
number of insights and guidance updates are displayed in Fig. 6
for each task. During the evaluation session with P1, P2, P3, and
P4, we used Hermes with the ESC dataset (see Section 4.1). The
FFA dataset was exceptionally presented to P5, who is domain
expert in the field (see Section 5.6).

5.2. Participants’ background

P1 and P2: The participating experts (not involved in the de-
sign) can all be considered potential Hermes target users (see Sec-
tion 3.1). The two participants are employees from the economic
and trade policy department of the “Austrian Federal Economic
Chamber” (Wirtschaftskammer Osterreich or WKO). They analyze
the trends of business interests in Austria as well as evaluat-
ing and predicting the effects economic policies and regulations
throughout the different regions of the country. Both participants
use Microsoft Excel (Microsoft, 2018) as well as “Python” and “R”

18

to explore and present their data. However, they report a lack of
visual tools that support their work. Therefore, it is expected that
they also lack visual guidance. One participant was familiar with
“Tableau”, however does not apply it in his work context.

P3: Our third participant is an economist, who works as the
global treasury controller within an international company. In
contrast to the other two participants, who looked after the
productivity of entire regions and multiple companies, P3 is in-
terested in the company’s business only. Therefore, P3 is looking
for a system that could support investment decisions with infor-
mation about product supply chain networks. The most used tool
by P3 is Microsoft Excel Sheets (Microsoft, 2018) and P3 claims
to be familiar with simple visual data representations existing o
it.

P4: Aiming for a focused qualitative evaluation of the guidance
aspects in Hermes, we invited a VA expert researcher with a
research focus on guidance. The participant was used to develop
VA techniques.

P5: Our fifth participant is a financial fraud expert that works
for a national bank. P5 claim being familiar with a good range of
visualization techniques and, on her/his work, s/he uses visual-
izations for presentation and exploration proposes.

5.3. Evaluation of the overview board (P1, P2, P3)

We designed the Overview Tasks (OT) to evaluate the first of
the two Hermes’s boards, which was designed to fulfill require-
ment R1 (see Section 3.3).

The tasks are the following:

OT1: Which are the biggest sectors in Austria?

OT2: Which regions present more manufacturing companies?

OT3: What is the main region? Why?

OT4: By looking and interacting to the Matrix View (Fig. 2: B’),
what type of conclusions could you take?
R. A. Leite, A. Arleo, J. Sorger et al.

All the participants concluded the tasks before the specified
time, and reported correct answers. Connection insights were
the most common insight category during the evaluation of the
Overview Board. However, OT4 did not present any connection
insight because it is an one view task. Overall, we interpret this
result as a positive consequence of presenting a fully interactive
multiple coordinate view approach that shows different dimen-
sions of the same data elements. The combination of different
selection and filtering features was the main aspect explored
during the performance of OT1, OT2, and OT3.

OT3 was especially designed to motivate value thinking by
presenting the words “main region” on its specification without
describing what was the comparison context encapsulated by the
word “main”. The participants could define different meanings to
the word “main”. Still the three participants could explore their
hypothesis and reasoning about the different possible outcomes
of this interpretation, thus, revealing the flexibility of the tool.

5.4. Evaluation of the network board (P1, P2, P3)

For this board we also conceived four tasks. To evaluate
R3 (see Section 3.3) we designed two similar network tasks (NT1
and NT2). The goal is understanding the impact of guidance dur-
ing the profile construction phase. To do so, we deactivated the
guidance features in Hermes when evaluating NT1 and reactivated
them on NT2. In addition, we asked our participants to tackle two
open tasks (NT3 and NT4), which allowed for multiple correct
answers. The goal is to observe how many insights and conclu-
sions the participants could draw within the given 5 min time
frame. NT3 and NT4 aim at supporting R2 and R4 analysis (see
Section 3.3).

NT1: Excluding the region ‘“Ober6ésterreich”, which View Nodes
are the sectors with the four highest income? How are they con-
nected? The task has to be completed without guidance support.

NT2: Excluding the region “Ober6ésterreich”, which View Nodes
are the sectors with the four highest outcome? How are they
connected? In this task the guidance features are enabled.

NT3: Choose two regions and explore their strongest connec-
tions. Discuss your findings.

NT4: Choose a region and search for growing sectors and
shrinking sectors. Discuss your findings.

Without guidance support, two out of the three experts were
not able to finish NT1. P2 achieved it but past the allotted 5 min
mark. Without visual guidance during profile creation, partic-
ipants were not able to precisely set the income slider to a
convenient income range, that led to the inclusion of a large
amount of nodes (noise) in each of the created profile nodes.
As a consequence, the resulting matched subgraphs did not help
comprehending the data and solving the task. On the other hand,
the attempts at narrowing the income range failed at including
the minimum amount of searched nodes specified by NT1.

With guidance support (NT2), all participants were able to
finish the similar task within less than two minutes. Guidance
thereby facilitates the determination of a threshold that incor-
porates data points relevant to the task. By observing the colored
ticks under the outcome slider, users could understand how many
nodes they were selecting, thus setting a “convenient” slider
range. Moreover, since the excluded region is color coded on
the Slider Ticks, the participants could exclude samples from the
selection without necessarily interacting with selection region
filters (see Section 4.3.2), thus speeding up the profile creation
process. Tasks NT3 and NT4 are open exploration tasks that were
designed to motivate open insights. Both tasks resulted in the
most significant amount of insights across all tasks (see Fig. 6).

Overall, the participants provided positive feedback about Her-
mes and complemented different aspects: “The guidance features

19

Visual Informatics 4 (2020) 11-22

are really useful” (P1), “.. compared to the technology I use, to
perform network exploration tasks, this approach is much faster
and appealing” (P3), or “..to perform the same tasks with our
current approaches is almost impossible” (P2). P3 also commented
positively about the possibility to switch to a bipartite layout:
“it is good when I search for less groups because the layout gets
more organized”. All participants gave positive feedback on the
temporal aspect derived by the growing rate slider. It presented
a main role during many of the participants’ insights elaboration.

Considering the feedback and the results of the task evalu-
ation, the data appears to support our claims, confirming that
Hermes fulfills the design requirements. NT1/2 show the capabil-
ities of Hermes when handling queries, with the guidance sup-
port (R3). The amount of findings in NT3/4 and the feedback
gathered suggest that Hermes succeeds in enabling multi-scale
network exploration (R2) and the tracking of monetary flows and
region/sector connection (R4).

5.5. Guidance expert feedback (P4)

The focus of this evaluation was to have P4 to interact with
the tool to collect expert feedback about the guidance aspects
and not measure insights or answers precision. After perform-
ing the complete evaluation, during the post tasks interview,
the participant mentioned several positive points. S/He comple-
mented different aspects such as the short interaction response
time of the Overview Board and the tasks enabled by the Net-
work Board. S/He highlighted the importance of the guidance
features during the profile creation (see Section 4.3.2 view A).
Starting with the Slider Ticks (see Fig. 3: 1) s/he commented:
“-with the guidance it works perfectly to select the profile that you
want to see, otherwise it is complicated to find what you want. It
gives you hints about the data that you are selecting”. Concerning
“Selection Tiles” (see Fig. 3: ii) and “Guided Network Pattern
Construction” (see Fig. 3: iii), P4 considered this guidance aspect
as something in between the orienting degree and the directing
degree, more inclined to directing degree (see Section 4.4). Con-
cerning the “Switching to Bipartite Layout” (see Fig. 5: iv), s/he
commented: “it is a good choice that the system supports this
automatic decision. It is visually clear for me that this is a better
layout for comparison tasks and group understanding”.

When asked about future recommendation for guidance fea-
tures, a point raised by our participant was the limits of guid-
ance (see Section 6). How much guidance is enough? S/He com-
mented that guidance should always serve a propose, a task.
However, when trying to add guidance to many tasks in the same
tool, guidance features trend to overcome each other, leading
users to confusion. Based on that comment, s/he mentioned that
all proposed tasks that were covered by guidance aspects, were
not disturbing each other and, s/he would not suggest any further
guidance implementation, unless the system is extended to sup-
port new tasks. In the same sense, s/he also complemented that
the profile creation view does not enforce a specific workflow,
avoiding influencing users to limit their profile creation: “..it is
good to avoid steps repetition during exploration tasks”.

Overall, s/he was surprised to see different degrees of guidance
in Hermes. Her/His favorite features were the guidance imple-
mented in the profile creation and the pattern search view. S/He
highlighted several times how much easier and better it was to
have guidance features supporting her/him during these tasks.

5.6. Applying Hermes to bank account networks (P5)

We demonstrate the generalizability of our approach by ap-
plying it to a different domain, i.e., the analysis of financial
R. A. Leite, A. Arleo, J. Sorger et al.

60
50

40

. : 7
0
OT1 OT2

—
oS

OT3

OT4 NT1

Visual Informatics 4 (2020) 11-22

 

NT2

NT3 NT4

m™ Curiosity ® Coincidence ®Connection m Guidance Updates

Fig. 6. The overall number of and guidance updates we identified over the different board tasks. We report both the exact numbers in a table and an area chart to

easily extract trends from it.

fraud. The FFA data is a real-world dataset for which we ren-
der bank accounts as nodes and money transaction between
accounts as edges between them. Transaction are ranked accord-
ing to a metric that measures its how likely it is to be part of
a fraudulent behavior calculated by a bank internal automatic
algorithm. Hermes could be used by fraud investigators for tasks
such as identifying terrorists, bank credit exploration, or fraud
analysis. For these cases, profiles of bank accounts could be com-
posed of features like age, balance, transaction frequency, account
growing rate. With the combination of profile definition and
profile-based network pattern queries the investigators would
gain a supportive and flexible ally.

We also had the opportunity to present Hermes applied to
FFA data to a FFA expert (P5), and to collect positive feedback.
P5 was able to interact and understand all Hermes’ features. In
particular, the expert appreciated: (1) the potential of flexible
profile construction coupled with the network pattern search for
detecting networks of fraudsters, (2) the quick pattern search
response of Hermes, and (3) the guidance aspects during profile
creation - which s/he assessed essential for understanding what
s/he was selecting and allowing for an informed profile creation.

6. Discussion and future work

In this section we list the limitations of Hermes and we dis-
cuss some general aspects about guidance that came up during
the discussions with the guidance expert. Moreover, we derive
directions for future work.

Limited Support of Profile Membership Identification. We
provide a feature that changes the layout of the node-link dia-
gram to help the user understand which nodes belong to which
profiles (see Section 4.4: iv). By now this feature is limited to
bipartite graphs (i.e., including only two profiles). Because this
feature was very well received in the evaluation, we plan to
incorporate a similar functionality also for queries including more
than two profiles. This comes with additional challenges of how
to arrange the graph layout when the number of profiles exceeds
a certain limit. Radial layouts, for instance, might be implemented
to address this problem.

Connections Between Profiles are AND Operations From our
requirement analysis we derived the need of analysts to search
for patterns where all node types of one profile are connected to

20

all node types of another profile. Thus, connecting two profiles in
Hermes queries the data for network structures in which nodes
of different profiles with an AND (i.e., all nodes of one profile
are connected to all nodes from the other profile). However, new
ideas came up in the evaluation and thus, we want to further
investigate if connecting two profiles with an OR operation would
provide additional benefits to analysts.

Pre-defined Profiles & Network Structures. Another idea
stemming from our evaluation with domain experts is to provide
pre-defined profiles as well as pre-defined network structures of
common queries. For example, experts suggested a profile that
involves only elements with a high grow rate or a profile of
elements with a high outcome. They also suggested that pre-
defined network structures would support an even faster analysis.
However, to provide pre-defined profiles and network structures,
domain knowledge is required. Moreover, it is not clear how such
“ready to use” building blocks influence users in their analysis
and if they would limit exploration breadths (Wall et al., 2017).

Performance Considerations. As we described in Section 3.1,
we experimented with the ESC dataset, a fairly dense graph.
Despite this, thanks to the simplicity of our approach (see Sec-
tion 4.2), we observed that Hermes featured low response times
also with more complex queries. During our expert evaluation
and internal testing, we tested queries that included stars (a
central node connected to some neighbors), cycles, disconnected
components, and combinations thereof up to 21 profile nodes
(whose constraints identified several nodes in the model graph).
We measured the response times, from the pattern extraction to
the display of the matched sub-graph, which peaked at 67 ms.

Classification of Guidance. It is not always unambiguous how
to classify the provided guidance and even what should be con-
sidered as guidance. However, the expert agreed that quite of-
ten features might present a mixture of different degrees. For
instance, all Selection Tiles that do not exist in the data in com-
bination with the given filter settings are grayed out. This might
be considered just a hint for orientation (i.e., orienting guidance),
but it also presents users with a list of meaningful alternatives
to proceed with, which is considered directing guidance. Some-
times basic visualization features comply with the definition of
guidance. For example, in a node-link diagram, encoding the
connectivity degree of a node in the node’s size to emphasize how
well a node is connected might also be considered some sort of
R. A. Leite, A. Arleo, J. Sorger et al.

orienting guidance. However, these basic features are common
practice in the visualization community and, therefore, are not
considered to be guidance. Further research is needed to better
distinguish guidance.

7. Conclusion

We developed Hermes, a guidance-enriched VA approach to
support national economic supply chain analysis on an overview
level as well as on a detailed network analysis level. The design
and implementation of Hermes was inspired by our own research
experience and by tight collaboration with economy domain ex-
perts, with whom we elaborated a number of design require-
ments. Our approach consists of two connected boards which
provide overview and network views augmented with various
guidance aspects to support economy experts with effectively
exploring and analyzing complex data.

We designed and evaluated Hermes with two real-world data
sets and five domain experts (three economists, one FFA expert,
and one guidance researcher expert), from whom we obtained
positive feedback and further ideas on various aspects of our
design. The added value of our approach is: (1) the analysis of
insights gained by our evaluators, (2) a positive evaluation of the
guidance aspects by a guidance researcher expert, and (3) the
demonstration of the transferability of Hermes to FFA.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Roger A. Leite: Term definition, Methodology, Development,
Software, Programming, Formal analysis, Application of statis-
tical, Investigation, Conducting a research, Resources, Provision
of study materials, Data management, Writing - original draft,
Writing - review & editing, Visualization preparation, Supervision,
Oversight and leadership responsibility, Project administration,
Management and coordination. Alessio Arleo: Term definition,
Formal analysis, Application of statistical, Investigation, Conduct-
ing a research, Methodology, Development, Data management,
Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Johannes
Sorger: Term definition, Methodology, Development, Investiga-
tion, Conducting a research, Data management, Writing - orig-
inal draft, Writing - review & editing. Theresia Gschwandtner:
Term definition, Methodology, Development, Writing - original
draft, Writing - review & editing. Silvia Miksch: Term definition,
Methodology, Development, Writing - review & editing, Supervi-
sion, Oversight and leadership responsibility, Funding acquisition,
Acquisition of the financial support.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by the Research Cluster
“Smart Communities and Technologies (SmartCT)” at TU Wien
and the Austrian Science Fund (FWF), grant P31419-N31
Knowledge-Assisted Visual Analytics (KnoVA).
Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found
online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.visinf.2020.09.006.

21

Visual Informatics 4 (2020) 11-22
References

Aigner, W., Miksch, S., Schumann, H., Tominski, C, 2011. Visualization of
Time-Oriented Data. Springer Science & Business Media.

Allen, F., Babus, A., 2009. Networks in finance. In: The network challenge:
strategy, profit, and risk in an interlinked world, Vol. 367. Wharton School
Publishing Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G., 2006. Exploratory Analysis of Spatial and Temporal
Data: A Systematic Approach. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg.

Archambault, D., Purchase, H.C., 2012. Mental map preservation helps user ori-
entation in dynamic graphs. In: International Symposium on Graph Drawing.
Springer, pp. 475-486.

Bigelow, A., Nobre, C., Meyer, M., Lex, A., 2019. Origraph: interactive net-
work wrangling. In: 2019 IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and
Technology. VAST, IEEE, pp. 81-92.

Ceneda, D., Gschwandtner, T., May, T., Miksch, S., Schulz, H.-J., Streit, M.,
Tominski, C., 2017. Characterizing guidance in visual analytics. IEEE Trans.
Vis. Comput. Graphics (1), 111-120.

Ceneda, D., Gschwandtner, T., May, T., Miksch, S., Streit, M., Tominski, C., 2018a.
Guidance or no guidance? A decision tree can help. In: EuroVis Workshop
on Visual Analytics. EuroVA, The Eurographics Association.

Ceneda, D., Gschwandtner, T., Miksch, S., 2019. A review of guidance approaches
in visual data analysis: a multifocal perspective. 38, (3), pp. 861-879.

Ceneda, D., Gschwandtner, T., Miksch, S., Tominski, C., 2018b. Guided visual ex-
ploration of cyclical patterns in time-series. In: Visualization in Data Science.
IEEE Digital Library, Posterprdsentation: Visualization in Data Science (VDS
at IEEE VIS 2018), Berlin; 2018-10-22.

Chau, D.H., Faloutsos, C., Tong, H., Hong, J.I., Gallagher, B., Eliassi-Rad, T., 2008.
Graphite: A visual query system for large graphs. In: Data Mining Workshops,
2008. ICDMW’O8. IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 963-966.

Cockburn, A., Karlson, A., Bederson, B.B., 2009. A review of overview + detail,
zooming, and focus + context interfaces. ACM Comput. Surv. 41 (1), 2.

Didimo, W., Giacché, F., Montecchiani, F., 2015. Kojaph: visual definition and
exploration of patterns in graph databases. In: International Symposium on
Graph Drawing and Network Visualization. Springer, pp. 272-278.

Didimo, W., Giamminonni, L., Liotta, G., Montecchiani, F., Pagliuca, D., 2018. A
visual analytics system to support tax evasion discovery. Decis. Support Syst.
110, 71-83.

Didimo, W., Liotta, G., Montecchiani, F., Palladino, P., 2011. An advanced network
visualization system for financial crime detection. In: Pacific Visualization
Symposium. PacificVis, IEEE, pp. 203-210.

Dumas, M., McGuffin, M.J., Lemieux, V.L., 2014. Financevis.net - A visual survey
of financial data visualizations. In: Poster Abstracts of IEEE VIS 2014. URL
http://financevis.net/, Poster and Extended Abstract.

Fritz, O., Kurzmann, R., Zakarias, G., Streicher, G., et al., 2003. Constructing
regional input-output tables for Austria. Austrian Econ. Q, 1, 23-39.

Fujiwara, T., Crnovrsanin, T., Ma, K.-L., 2018. Concise provenance of interactive
network analysis. Vis. Inform. 2 (4), 213-224.

Ghoniem, M., Fekete, J.-D., Castagliola, P., 2004. A comparison of the readabil-
ity of graphs using node-link and matrix-based representations. In: IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization. IEEE, pp. 17-24.

Harrower, M., Brewer, C.A., 2003. ColorBrewer. org: an online tool for selecting
colour schemes for maps. Cartogr. J. 40 (1), 27-37.

Holten, D., Van Wijk, J.J., 2009. A user study on visualizing directed edges
in graphs. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, pp. 2299-2308.

Horvitz, E., 1999. Principles of mixed-initiative user interfaces. In: Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM,
pp. 159-166.

Huang, M.L., Liang, J., Nguyen, Q.V., 2009. A visualization approach for frauds
detection in financial market. In: 13th International Conference Information
Visualisation. IEEE, pp. 197-202.

Isenberg, T., Isenberg, P., Chen, J., Sedlmair, M., Mdller, T., 2013. A systematic
review on the practice of evaluating visualization. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput.
Graphics 19 (12), 2818-2827.

Keller, R., Eckert, C.M., Clarkson, P.J., 2006. Matrices or node-link diagrams:
which visual representation is better for visualising connectivity models?.
Inf. Vis. 5 (1), 62-76.

Klein, G., 2013. Seeing What Others Don’t: The Remarkable Ways We Gain
Insights. PublicAffairs.

Ko, S., Cho, I., Afzal, S., Yau, C., Chae, J., Malik, A., Beck, K., Jang, Y., Ribarsky, W.,
Ebert, D.S., 2016. A survey on visual analysis approaches for financial data. In:
Computer Graphics Forum, Vol. 35, No. 3. Wiley Online Library, pp. 599-617.

Koenig, P.-Y., Zaidi, F., Archambault, D., 2010. Interactive searching and visual-
ization of patterns in attributed graphs. In: Proceedings of Graphics Interface
2010. Canadian Information Processing Society, pp. 113-120.

Kriglstein, S., Pohl, M., 2015. Choosing the right sample? Experiences of select-
ing participants for visualization evaluation. In: Aigner, W., Rosenthal, P.,
Scheidegger, C. (Eds.), EuroVis Workshop on Reproducibility, Verification, and
Validation in Visualization. EuroRV3, The Eurographics Association.
R. A. Leite, A. Arleo, J. Sorger et all.

Microsoft, 2018. Excel. http://office.microsoft.com/en-us/excel/. (Accessed 06
October 2018).

Miksch, S., Aigner, W., 2014. A matter of time: Applying a data—users-tasks
design triangle to visual analytics of time-oriented data. Comput. Graph. 38,
286-290.

Munzner, T., 2009. A nested model for visualization design and validation. IEEE
Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics 15 (6), 921-928.

Okoe, M., Jianu, R., Kobourov, S.G., 2018. Node-link or adjacency matrices: Old
question, new insights. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics.

ONACE, 2019. ONACE 2008 - struktur. (Accessed 20 July 2019).

Pienta, R., Tamersoy, A., Endert, A., Navathe, S., Tong, H., Chau, D.H., 2016.
Visage: Interactive visual graph querying. In: Proceedings of the International
Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces. ACM, pp. 272-279.

Shen, Z., Ma, K.-L., Eliassi-Rad, T., 2006. Visual analysis of large heterogeneous
social networks by semantic and structural abstraction. IEEE Trans. Vis.
Comput. Graphics 12 (6), 1427-1439.

TekuSova, T., Kohlhammer, J., 2008. Visual analysis and exploration of complex
corporate shareholder networks. In: Electronic Imaging 2008. International
Society for Optics and Photonics.

22

Visual Informatics 4 (2020) 11-22

Timmer, M.P., Dietzenbacher, E., Los, B., Stehrer, R., de Vries, GJ., 2015. An
illustrated user guide to the world input-output database: the case of global
automotive production. Rev. Int. Econ. 23 (3), 575-605.

Van den Elzen, S., Van Wijk, J.J., 2014. Multivariate network exploration and
presentation: From detail to overview via selections and aggregations. IEEE
Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics 20 (12), 2310-2319.

Wall, E., Blaha, L.M., Franklin, L., Endert, A., 2017. Warning, bias may occur: A
proposed approach to detecting cognitive bias in interactive visual analytics.
In: 2017 IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology. VAST,
IEEE, pp. 104-115.

Ware, C., 2012. Information Visualization: Perception for Design. Elsevier.

Wien, W., 2019. Sabina - info - datenbanken. (Accessed 10 June 2019).

Willett, W., Heer, J., Agrawala, M., 2007. Scented widgets: Improving navigation
cues with embedded visualizations. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics 13 (6),
1129-1136.
