Np} | Digital Medicine

ARTICLE OPEN

www.nature.com/npjdigitalmed

® Check for updates

A digital health industry cohort across the health continuum

Adam B. Cohen@'*™, E. Ray Dorsey, Simon C. Mathews”, David W. Bates®” and Kyan Safavi®

The digital health industry has grown rapidly in the past decade. There will be few future aspects of healthcare untouched by digital
health. Thus, the current status of the industry, the implications of companies’ directions and clinical focus, and their external
funding are increasingly relevant to healthcare policy, regulation, research, and all healthcare stakeholders. Yet, little is known
about the degree to which the digital health industry has focused on the key domains in the health continuum, including
prevention, detection, and management. We performed a cross-sectional study of a US digital health industry cohort that received
publicly disclosed funding from 2011-2018. We assessed the number of companies; respective funding within each part of the
health continuum; and products and services by technology type, clinical indication, purchasers, and end users. In this emerging
industry, most companies focused on management of disease and the minority on prevention or detection. This asymmetry, which
is similar to the traditional healthcare system, represents an opportunity to focus on earlier parts of the health continuum. Patients
were a common purchaser of all products, but especially prevention-focused digital health products, implying a large unmet need

not yet served by the traditional healthcare system.

npj Digital Medicine (2020)3:68 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-020-0276-9

INTRODUCTION

The continuum of health spans the domains of disease preven-
tion, detection, and management’. Over the past decade, a
rapidly growing cohort of >1200 companies that exclusively focus
on digital health has received $33 billion in investment?. These
companies offer products and services addressing each aspect of
the health continuum. Their digital health products and services
bring the promise of greater scale, efficiency, access, convenience,
and patient engagement. Little is known, however, about how the
digital health industry has focused on these three domains of the
health continuum.

The current US healthcare system emphasizes management
over prevention and detection*”. In addition, chronic conditions
are responsible for at least 70% of deaths and 75% of US
healthcare expenditures*. Healthcare expenditures, too, center on
management of disease, disproportionately toward acute care and
sick visits, and the pharmacological, device, and services that treat
acute disease states°. Prevention, however, accounts for about 3%
of total US healthcare expenditures and <20% of National
Institutes of Health funding”’”. Although the cost-effectiveness of
current prevention-focused solutions is debated®, prevention
represents a potentially neglected part of the health continuum.
Digital health represents a new potential way to reduce disease
burden cost through disease prevention, as well as other parts of
the health continuum.

Few data are available regarding the digital health industry's
relative emphasis on each part of the health continuum, and the
types of products and services addressing each one. Although the
industry must develop products and services the healthcare
system purchases, they may or may not address the actual needs
of society across the health continuum.

This is a cross-sectional study from 2011 to 2018 of US-based
digital health companies using the Rock Health Digital Health
Funding Database maintained by Rock Health Inc®. Unlike other
databases that include digital health companies, the Rock Health
Digital Health Funding Database is curated specifically for digital
health. We assessed this cohort’s focus on each aspect of the
health continuum, including prevention, detection and manage-
ment, the latter of which was subcategorized into treatment,
monitoring, and coordination. We also evaluated the types of
technologies developed, the clinical indications addressed, end
users, and purchasers.

RESULTS

Company characteristics

Overall, 1214 companies were identified in the database. Since the
purpose of the study was to evaluate the industry's focus on the
patient health continuum, 702 (57.8%) companies met inclusion
criteria based on company objectives matching at least one
continuum category. These companies were focused directly on
patient health while excluded companies provided other offerings
(e.g., billing products, customer acquisition) (Supplementary Table
1). Supplementary Table 2 section provides a full list of company
objectives and technology type descriptions.

Companies were founded between 1970 and 2018. The
company business status at the end of the study period was:
active 607 (86.5%); acquired 62 (8.8%); defunct 22 (3.1%); other 11
(1.6%).

Health Technologies, National Health Mission Area, The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Lab (APL), 11100 Johns Hopkins Road, Laurel, MD 20723, USA. *The Johns
Hopkins Hospital, Department of Neurology, 1800 Orleans Street, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. *University of Rochester Medical Center, Center for Health + Technology, Saunders
Research Building, 265 Crittenden Boulevard, CU 420694, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. “Armstrong Institute for Patient Safety and Quality, 750 E Pratt Street, 15th Floor, Baltimore,
MD 21202, USA. Johns Hopkins Hospital, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, 1800 Orleans Street, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. Brigham & Women’s
Hospital, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine and Primary Care, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA. ’Partners Healthcare, Clinical and
Quality Analysis, Information Systems, 93 Worcester Road P.O. Box 81905, Wellesley, MA 02481, USA. 8Massachusetts General Hospital, Department of Anesthesia, 55 Fruit Street,
Boston, MA 02114, USA. “email: adam.cohen@jhuapl.edu

np} nature partner

Scripps Research Translational Institute journals
np}

A.B. Cohen et al.

 

$7.0

$6.0

wn w
= a
co co

Funding (US dollars in billions)
2
co

$2.0

$1.0

$0.0
2011

2012

2013 2014

mPrevention em Detecton © Mamgemert

Fig. 1
with a singular or mixed focus among the categories.

Company distribution and funding across the health continuum

Most digital health companies (73.2%) had a focus on manage-
ment of disease, while the minority had a focus on prevention
(23.8%) or detection (13.0%). The cohort received $20.8 billion of
total funding from 2011 to 2018. Companies that focused
singularly (only one continuum category) on disease management
(64% of companies) also had the greatest total investment at
$12.8 billion (61.3% of funding), compared with $4.7 billion (22.6%
of funding) with a singular prevention focus (19.8% of companies),
$1.5 billion (7.3% of funding) with a singular detection focus (6.8%
of companies), and $1.8 billion (8.8 % of funding) with mixed focus
(multiple continuum categories, 9.4% of companies). Each
continuum category experienced a general growth trend in
funding from 2011 to 2018, reflecting a $0.7 billion annual average
growth rate for all companies (Fig. 1). Among prevention,
detection, management, and mixed companies, management-
focused companies experienced the most annual average growth
at $0.4 billion as compared to $0.1 billion for the others.

Company clinical indications, end users, and purchasers across the
health continuum

Tables 1-3 show the analysis of the two-way combinations
between company characteristics (technologies, clinical indica-
tions, end users, and purchasers) for the entire cohort (“All”).
General software was the most common technology type for the
entire cohort. Further, most among the cohort did not target a
specific clinical indication, such as cardiology or neurologic
conditions.

Tables 1-3 also show the intersection of these characteristics
within each continuum category. General software was the most
common technology type among companies with prevention and
coordination focus; artificial intelligence among detection com-
panies; and telemedicine for treatment and monitoring compa-
nies. Prevention-, treatment-, monitoring-, and coordination-
focused companies typically did not target a specific clinical
indication. Detection companies, however, most commonly
targeted “other” populations, which included a range of indica-
tions such as dental and dermatologic indications.

Individual consumers or providers, as opposed to other
purchaser and end-user types, were the most commonly targeted

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 68

 

2015 2016 2017 2018

= Mixed

Company funding by year across the health continuum. Total funding per year for each health continuum category for companies

end user and purchaser for the entire cohort and across each
continuum category.

Tables 1-3 show the most common “specific” technology (i.e.,
not general software) and clinical indication (i.e, not none,
populations, or other) combinations for each continuum category.
The leading such specific technologies were telemedicine, artificial
intelligence, and wearables and biosensors while the leading such
clinical indications were neurologic, mental health, and
cardiovascular.

Table 4 shows the most frequent intersections for three key
company features—clinical indication, technology type, and
continuum category. The most common such combinations were
companies that targeted no specific clinical indication, deployed
general software, and were management-focused in the coordina-
tion domain. This combination type was more than twice as
common as any other type. All such three-way combinations are
shown in the Supplementary Table 3.

Of note, blockchain, robotics, and augmented and virtual reality
technologies, and women’s health-focused companies, despite
being highly discussed in the media and literature, were among
the least common areas of technology or clinical indication focus
for the entire cohort and for most of the continuum categories.
Pulmonary-focused companies were the least common clinical
indication for the entire cohort and across all continuum
categories.

DISCUSSION

In terms of both the number of companies and total funding
dollars, this large digital health industry cohort has focused on
disease management over disease prevention or detection.
Overall, between 2011 and 2018, we found that less than one-
quarter of digital health investment dollars went to companies
singularly focused on disease prevention and even fewer on
disease detection. Similarly, 23.8% and 13% of companies focused
on prevention or diagnosis, respectively, while 73.2% focused on
management.

This cohort’s relative lack of focus on disease prevention, and
relatively accelerated growth of management-focused companies,
is likely multifactorial. The relative lack of focus on prevention is
similar to historical estimates of the total expenditure in

Scripps Research Translational Institute
Table 1.

Technology | General
software
Artificial
intelligence
Wearables &
biosensors
Digital
medical device
Remote
monitoring

Genomics and

sequencing

Non-medical
device
hardware
Internet of

Things

Augmented
and virtual
reality

Robotics

Blockchain

Scripps Research Translational Institute

A.B. Cohen et al.

np)

 

Digital health industry technology types across the health continuum.

Prevention Detection Treatment

9] 266

18.7%

11.0%

23.1%

Monitoring

284

Coordination

295

49.5%

33.2%!

11.9%

 

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 68
np}

A.B. Cohen et al.

 

Health continuum: the percentage of companies with each characteristic is shown for each part of the continuum. Since one company may have multiple
characteristics within each category (technology type, clinical indication, end user, purchaser), rows and columns within each characteristics section add to
>100%.

The shade of each cell corresponds to the combination’s frequency (i.e., a dark cell reflects a more frequent combination). All company characteristics, outside
the continuum categories, were defined by Rock Health.

"Denotes leading combinations of a “specific” clinical indication or technology type. Here, specific refers to any technology type or clinical indication excluding
“general,” “none,” “populations,” or “other”

ow

Table 2. Digital health industry clinical indications across the health continuum.

All
702

Coordination
295

Treatment
266

Prevention Detection
n 167 91

Monitoring
284

39.8%
18.7%
12.3%
3.2%
8.8%
9.5%
9.9%"
0.7%

54.2%
24.1%
8.8%
1.4%
6.4%"
4.7%
1.4%
1.4%

46.2%
15.4%
11.7%
7.1%"
7.0%
6.0%
5.8%
4.3%

62.9%
8.4%
5.4%
10.8%!
6.6%
5.4%
2.4%
0.0%

18.7%
12.1%
24.2%
14.3%
3.3%
6.6%
15.4%"
14.3%

33.1%
17.7%
19.2%
7.5%
11.7%"
6.0%
3.4%
7.1%

Clinical indication None
Populations
Other
Neurologic
Mental health
Endocrine
Cardiovascular

Oncologic

3.0%
0.0%

7.7%
1.1%

Women’s health
Pulmonary

3.9%
2.8%

2.0%
1.0%

4.1%
1.4%

4.9%
0.8%

Health continuum: the percentage of companies with each characteristic is shown for each part of the continuum. Since one company may have multiple
characteristics within each category (technology type, clinical indication, end user, purchaser), rows and columns within each characteristics section add to
>100%.
"Denotes leading combinations of a “specific” Technology Type. Here, specific refers to any Technology Type excluding “general software,” or “other”

healthcare on prevention services’. The outsized focus on
management of disease may be related to a less robust
marketplace for prevention- and detection-focused products. US-
based healthcare reimbursement, which is mainly fee-for-service,
largely pays providers for management activities. A different
pattern may be seen in other countries with more value-based
care and different incentive structures. Further a different pattern
may be seen if the US were to increasingly adopt new
reimbursement models, such as accountable care organizations,
which are currently limited in scope.

Reimbursement of disease prevention, however, is far less clear
under the US-based healthcare reimbursement structure. Partici-
pating payers may not receive financial benefits since younger
beneficiaries may change insurers. Only beginning in 2005 did
Medicare begin to cover prevention visits, but beneficiary
participation remains low”'®. To determine coverage, Medicare
performs cost-effectiveness analyses for preventive services but
not treatment services’. Lifestyle modification programs, for
example, have been shown to be more effective than metformin
to prevent diabetes, but only the latter is broadly covered by US
insurers”''. Given the lack of reimbursement for prevention-
focused activities, digital health companies may be focusing on
offerings that fit into the current reimbursement model. If US
healthcare shifts to a value-based system, however, prevention-
and detection-focused digital health technologies may find a
more robust market in digital health.

Digital health companies offering technologies that reduce care
inefficiencies, cost, and administrative burden are poised to
address to support value-based care in the US'*'*. Such
companies could reduce the $760 to $935 billion in annual waste,
estimated to account for 25% of total care spending'*. Other
digital companies enabling value-based care offer care coordina-
tion functions, provide access to behavioral health, and address

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 68

 

certain social determinants of health'”'*. The traditional health-
care system has struggled with all of these areas. Further, care
team satisfaction and experience issues, which may account for at
least $4.6 billion in annual costs'°, is an emerging digital health
focus and another potential enabler of value-based care'*’"®.

Additionally, effective disease prevention strategies may reside
outside the typical boundaries of healthcare, which rely upon
patient-provider interactions within clinics and hospitals'°. Strate-
gies appealing directly to the patient may be more impactful than
those involving the traditional healthcare system. Major health
organizations and governing bodies, including the World Health
Organization, have cited “Health Promotion” as a central goal to
improve health and minimize patients’ interactions with the
healthcare system through disease prevention'’. Digital health
products and services represent such approaches to care outside
traditional healthcare interactions, potentially at much lower cost.
We found that when digital health companies focused on
prevention, they most commonly targeted patients both as end
users and purchasers. If the most effective prevention strategies
directly engage patients without requiring traditional healthcare
setting interactions, digital health may shift toward prevention.
Patients already demand and consume products not provided by
traditional healthcare, including the wide range of complementary
and alternative medicine products and services. Future studies
should further explore the mismatch between patient needs, what
traditional healthcare provides, and what gaps can be addressed
by digital health.

Although much of the conversation in digital health centers on
emerging, specific differentiating technologies (e.g., artificial intelli-
gence, blockchain), we found that the most common digital health
companies deployed only general software and not these differ-
entiating technologies. Further, companies most commonly had no
particular clinical indication focus, indicating an industry-wide trend

Scripps Research Translational Institute
Table 3.

Prevention Detection

167 91

—
End User consumers
Biopharma
companies

Purchaser
Individual
consumers
Biopharma
companies

Health continuum: the percentage of companies with each characteristic is shown for each part of the continuum. Since one company may have multiple
characteristics within each category (technology type, clinical indication, end user, purchaser), rows and columns within each characteristics section add to
>100%.
The shade of each cell corresponds to the combination’s frequency (i.e., a dark cell reflects a more frequent combination). All company characteristics, outside
the continuum categories, were defined by Rock Health.

not targeting specific conditions or clinical problems, which has been
reported previously'®. This approach potentially limits the ability to
impact specific high-burden conditions since companies’ may not be
structured to explicitly address them.

We also found that patients were a common purchaser of
digital health products and services; they were the lead purchaser

Scripps Research Translational Institute

Treatment

A.B. Cohen et al.

 

Digital health industry end users and purchasers across the health continuum.

Monitoring Coordination

266 284 295

 

among prevention digital health products and services. This
implies patients demand and consume health services not
provided by the traditional healthcare system, which suggests a
large unmet need.

Wearables and biosensors were the most commonly used
specific technology types among prevention companies. Given

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 68
np}

A.B. Cohen et al.

 

Table 4. Top clinical indication/technology type pairings across health continuum.

Clinical

Indication Technology Type

Continuum Number of

Category Companies

Populations Telemedicine

Populations General software

Coordination

Coordination

Wearables &

Cardiovascular biosensors

Monitoring

 

Mental health Telemedicine
Wearables &
Neurologic biosensors

Digital medical
Endocrine device
Women's health Telemedicine
Women's health” Telemedicine
Wearables &

Pulmonary biosensors

 

Treatment

Monitoring

Coordination

The shade of each cell corresponds to the combination’s frequency (i.e., a dark cell reflects a more frequent combination). All company characteristics, outside

the continuum categories, were defined by Rock Health.

*Only for the “populations” and “women’s health” clinical indications were there ties for top pairings; both sets of ties are shown in the table.

the wide array of sensor types (e.g., accelerometers, cameras) and
form factors (e.g., headbands, watches)'’, many conditions and
digital biomarkers are being investigated, potentially paving a
road toward increased condition-specific prevention digital health
technologies. These technologies, first validated to detect or
monitor a specific condition, may be repurposed to prevent that
condition by identifying early warning signs. For example, in the
past two years, the US Food and Drug Administration cleared
medical devices such as wearable glucose monitors that targeted
diabetics*°*'. As such technologies become less invasive, they
could be validated in healthy people at risk of developing diabetes
to identify glucose perturbations that predict disease onset,
thereby enabling targeted lifestyle and medication prevention
strategies.

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 68

 

Neurologic conditions represented the most common condition
targeted for prevention. Randomized-controlled trials of digital
health products and services have predominantly evaluated
management- and not prevention-focused digital health technol-
ogies for neurological conditions~”. In the peer-reviewed literature,
prevention-focused companies targeting cognitive cognitions
(through smartphone-based cognitive games for which data are
limited)** and sleep (through varied smartphone- and wearables/
biosensors-based approaches for which data are stronger for
digital cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia*’).

Although we identified no prevention-focused companies
targeting oncology or pulmonary conditions, this may have been
an artifact of our company characterization scheme. Digital health
technologies that targeted modifiable risk factors such as smoking
cessation, for example, would impact varied pulmonary diseases,

Scripps Research Translational Institute
Table 5.

A.B. Cohen et al.

np)

 

Continuum of health category assignments based on company objectives.

Continuum categories

Prevention

Objectives
Fitness and wellness
Prevention of disease
Diagnosis of disease
Treatment of disease
Clinical decision support and precision medicine
On-demand healthcare services
Population health management

Monitoring of disease

Care coordination
Patient adherence

Company objectives were defined by Rock Health.

but would not have been characterized as pulmonary-focused in
our analysis. Further, one group reported that over 40% of all
incident cancers and cancer deaths were attributable to modifi-
able risk factors such as cigarette smoking, excess body weight,
and alcohol intake*?. Exemplar risk factor-focused digital health
technologies include mobile-based cognitive behavioral therapy
for smoking cessation or text message- or interactive mobile app-
based recommendations tailored to the patient's risk factor*°. The
recommendation-based approaches can be paired with various
technologies to track measures related to exercise*°. Nevertheless,
despite this indirect potential focus on oncology or pulmonary
conditions, there likely exist opportunities to target these potential
digital health gaps given the high burden of cancer, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, and asthma.

More than any other continuum category, detection-focused
digital health companies built artificial intelligence products.
Artificial intelligence has potential utility in every aspect of
healthcare*’, but machine-assisted image interpretation (radiolo-
gic, pathologic, optical) applications have been the most
studied*®. Although artificial intelligence performance has
matched or exceeded clinician performance in controlled study
environments and the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
approvals for these algorithms are accelerating, few studies have
prospectively measured impact in real world clinical environ-
ments®. At present, these applications assist clinicians and thus,
consistent with our findings, providers are the most commonly
targeted end users and purchasers.

Cardiovascular, oncologic, and neurologic conditions were the
most common indications among detection-focused companies.
Cardiovascular disease detection has been studied for many
conditions using diverse sensor data (e.g., electrocardiogram,
optical coherence tomography)*”*’. Several companies use
wearables that capture heart rate or rhythm to detect cardiologic
conditions like atrial fibrillation, an emerging area for which best
practices have not been established*'*?. Some claim that similar
data can detect non-cardiac conditions like diabetes mellitus,
hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and sleep apnea”.

Clinicians represent the primary audience for most detection-
focused technologies. As such, these tools may be incorporated
into clinical practice. Hospital systems and their clinicians
unaccustomed to these emerging tools must learn how to
compare, use, select, and integrate these tools into care, while
policy makers, researchers, and medical societies must continue to
study the impact of these technologies in practice.

Scripps Research Translational Institute

Detection Management

Treatment Monitoring Coordination

 

Telemedicine represented the most common specific technol-
ogy used by the digital health industry to impact care manage-
ment. This trend existed across all management categories, and is
aligned with other reports demonstrating that telemedicine
companies are among the most highly funded in the digital
health industry**. Such a trend will likely continue as telemedicine
reimbursement parity (as compared to routine clinical counters)
increases.

Despite the high level of company activity in telemedicine we
observed, telemedicine remains a low overall proportion of actual
care, including rural Medicare and Veterans Administration
beneficiaries, despite the relatively common (34%) lifetime
exposure to telemedicine for a general consumer population”.
Taken together, this suggests this part of the industry has yet to
generate a broad-based impact on patient care management or
efficiency*®. While the case for broader impact remains under
investigation, the impact of certain condition-specific use cases
has been clearly demonstrated. Acute stroke, for example
(telestroke), has been well-studied and demonstrated to be safe
and effective?’

We found that mental health conditions were the most
common specific indication for all management-focused compa-
nies—and the most common pairings among mental health-
focused technologies were telemedicine-management compa-
nies. Well-studied mental health management technologies
include telemedicine services and cognitive behavioral therapy
as a digital therapeutic (i.e., digital medical device), which have
varying quality data to support effectiveness*®**. Oncologic,
pulmonary, and pediatric areas have been less of a focus among
management companies and may represent an opportunity for
the digital health industry.

In this study, the second most common specific indication was
cardiovascular for management companies focused on monitor-
ing. Currently available cardiovascular digital health monitoring
technologies mainly target arrhythmias through a smartphone
adapter, electrocardiogram patch, or smart band paired with a
smart watch for which early results are promising in select
populations like those with or at risk for atrial fibrillation
patients?'“°*'. Given the high burden of rehospitalization,
congestive heart failure digital monitoring strategies primarily
focus on preventing readmission by tracking modifiable factors
associated with clinical decline, such as blood pressure and
weight**. Managing modifiable cardiovascular risk factors (weight,
body mass index, blood pressure, lipid levels, smoking, diet,

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 68
A.B. Cohen et al.

 

physical activity) represents another common digital health
approach through monitoring and management-focused pro-
ducts*'*°. A 2015 meta-analysis of 51 digital health intervention
studies showed improvements in weight, body mass index, and
Framingham risk scores, but not blood pressure’.

This study had several limitations. Our cohort is not inclusive of
all digital health companies from 2011 to 2018. For example,
companies that develop digital health products but were not
exclusively dedicated to digital health (or healthcare) were not
included. Some of these companies, particularly large ones,
produce some of the best-selling*? and widely distributed digital
health products. Since our database drew from disclosed US deals
from 2011 to 2018, we did not include digital health companies
who did not disclose US deals or did so outside 2011-2018.

This is a potential source of bias in our findings. For example, we
may miss the contribution of smaller, early stage companies
potentially focusing on prevention of disease and thus changing
the direction of the industry. In addition, international companies
may be more apt to generate prevention-focused digital health
products given differences in reimbursement structure and policy
in the healthcare systems of other countries. Since our dataset
contained only US companies, we could not assess companies
outside the US. A future analysis of companies outside the US will
be of great interest. Compared with the US, countries with
different care models and incentive structures, such as single-
payer systems, may foster digital health environments that focus
on other portions of the care continuum, such as prevention.
Other potential company characteristics were not captured in our
assessment, such as whether or not the company had regulatory
approvals or published efficacy data, but will be useful for future
assessments.

The dataset used, although not representative of all digital
health companies, is the most comprehensive publicly available
digital health company set available to our knowledge. Other
databases also contain digital health companies and can be used
to assess the industry. To our knowledge, such other databases do
not offer company characteristics pertinent to the questions
posed in this study (e.g., clinical indication, technology type).
Further, they were less amenable to industry-wide digital health
analyses since no distinctions were made between digital health
and the broader field of healthcare. Further, the digital health
definition used by Rock Health to include companies in the
database was similar to our definition, which is based on that of
the FDA. Other potential company characteristics were not
captured in our assessment, such as whether or not the company
has regulatory approvals or published efficacy data and to what
degree, but will be useful for future assessments.

We attributed company objectives to specific continuum
categories. This was based on Rock Health’s definitions of these
company objectives and consensus among the authors. Our
attributions might differ from those attributed by another set of
authors. Further, the continuum-company objectives may over-
simplify a particular company’s actual focus, which may extend
beyond the continuum category labels we assigned.

It is also possible that the other company characterizations do
not fully capture each attribution type, such as company objective,
technology type, and clinical indication for each company
assessed. A large portion of the companies were general software
in technology type, which mainly represent software services and
mobile apps. Future assessments should tease out the subtypes of
such products. Clinical indication categories were broad (e.g.,
neurologic) and further studies could also assess _ specific
conditions (e.g., stroke, Parkinson disease).

Further, although companies addressing a risk factor like
smoking, for example, could have been assigned a clinical
indication reflecting conditions it could prevent or manage (e.g,.,
pulmonary, cardiovascular diseases), the company may have been
assigned another clinical indication (e.g., substance abuse disorder

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 68

in mental health). Although we assigned each company at least
one main continuum category attribution, one company could
have more than one attribution, which allowed a potentially more
accurate reflection of the companies range across the continuum.

Our results describe the focus of digital health but not the
impact. Leading privately funded digital health companies have
not produced substantial impact on disease burden or cost as
measured by reports on their products in peer-reviewed publica-
tions'®. In this study, however, we did not report on the effect of
any of these companies’ products and services within any
continuum category. The relative size of each continuum category
by number of companies or total funding did not necessarily
equate to effectiveness. Even though prevention companies were
the smallest in number and least funded, for example, some or
many of them could have had great impact.

In the emerging digital health industry, we found an outsized
focus on management of disease compared to prevention and
detection. This represents an opportunity to build an environment
that focuses on earlier parts of the health continuum. After general
software, wearables, artificial intelligence, and telemedicine were
the most common specific technology types across the sector. As
a result, training and educating the physician community on how
best to use these technologies will become increasingly impor-
tant. Given that most technologies targeted clinicians and patients
directly, they require a similarly rigorous validation as traditional
healthcare solutions to ensure their use improves outcomes and
cost-effectiveness. Lastly, patients were a common purchaser of
digital health products and services, and prevention-focused ones
in particular. Thus, a large unmet need likely exists, which is not
yet fulfilled by the traditional healthcare system.

METHODS
Definitions
The definition and categorization of digital health that we used align with
those used by the FDA. Digital health represents technologies that enable
consumers to make informed decisions about health across prevention,
diagnosis, and management of disease without requiring traditional care

settings*°. Categories of digital health included in this study are also
specified by the FDA*”*°.

Database and data

Companies, products, and services. We performed a cross-sectional
analysis using the Digital Health Funding Database maintained by Rock
Health Inc®. Company characteristics assessed were founding year,
company status (e.g., active, acquired, defunct), and total amount of
publicly disclosed funding.

The database is a repository of US-based digital health companies that
disclosed at least $2 million in funding from investors from 2011 to 2018°.
Companies with total funding under $2 million were excluded as such
companies are not consistently filed in the public domain.

Digital health companies were defined as those that build and sell
healthcare-focused technologies and services paired with these technol-
ogies, such as physician consultation through a telemedicine or remote
monitoring platform.

Variables

Company characteristics (Supplementary Table 2) of company products
and services included (1) company objective (i.e., value proposition) of the
product or service, (2) technology type of the company’s product, (3)
clinical indication the company targets, (4) the end-user type (those who
ultimately use the product or service), and (5) purchaser type. A single
company could have multiple characteristics. Company characteristics
were assigned by data abstractors from Rock Health based on reviews of
multiple online sources using publicly available information, including
public filings, press releases, industry databases, and company websites.
The reviews are conducted and findings are updated on a quarterly basis.

Scripps Research Translational Institute
Technology types

Technology types included artificial intelligence, augmented and _ virtual
reality, digital medical device, genomics and sequencing, internet of things,
non-medical device hardware, remote monitoring, telemedicine, wearables
and biosensors, other, and general software, which included varied software
services and mobile apps. Supplementary Table 2 includes definitions for each
of the characteristics for company objectives and technology types.

Clinical indications

The authors grouped clinical indications into ten groups: neurologic
(included sleep), mental health (included substance use disorders),
cardiovascular, pulmonary, oncologic, endocrine, women’s health, and
other (included dental and dermatologic). The penultimate group,
“populations”, referred to companies targeting a broad swath of a
population or a medical field outside the aforementioned indications.
These included pediatrics, surgery, aging, and underserved populations.
The last group, “none”, referred to a company that did not target any
particular clinical indication.

Health continuum

Prevention products and services were defined as those aiming to reduce
the incidence of disease by tracking or promoting healthy behaviors (e.g., a
digital fitness or activity tracker that measures physical movement).
Detection products and services were defined as those aiming to diagnose
medical conditions and diseases (e.g., wearable that measures electro-
cardiogram tracings to identify atrial fibrillation). Management products
and services were divided into three aspects of care: treatment,
monitoring, and care coordination. Treatment products and services
included those that intervened on diagnosed conditions or enabled
interventions and recommendations to be rendered in the care of a
patient. Monitoring products and services tracked progress or identified
exacerbations of diagnosed conditions. Coordination products and
services encompassed provider activities to care for patients.

Company inclusion criteria and continuum category attribution

Companies were included if they provided patient care-focused products
or services in one or more of the following company objective categories
defined by Rock Health (Supplementary Table 2). Each company objective
was then assigned to one or more continuum of health categories using
the schema in Table 5. Companies were then excluded if their objective
was not directly related to patient care and did not fit into the health
continuum concept. Such examples included non-clinical workflow, data
infrastructure, and customer acquisition and relationship management.

Reporting summary

Further information on experimental design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.

DATA AVAILABILITY

The datasets analyzed within the Digital Health Funding Database are available by
request through Rock Health at https://rockhealth.com/data/funding-raw-data/*. The
datasets were used with persmission from Rock Health for the current study, and are
also publicly available. Data are also available from the authors upon reasonable
request and with permission of Rock Health.

Received: 20 December 2019; Accepted: 3 April 2020;
Published online: 12 May 2020

REFERENCES

1. Bender, J. L., Yue, R. Y. K., To, M. J., Deacken, L. & Jadad, A. R. A lot of action, but
not in the right direction: systematic review and content analysis of smartphone
applications for the prevention, detection, and management of cancer. J. Med.
Internet Res. 15, e287 (2013).

2. Whelton, P. K. et al. ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/
PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of
high blood pressure in adults: executive summary: a Report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice
Guidelines. Circulation 138, e426-e483 (2018).

Scripps Research Translational Institute

A.B. Cohen et al.

Np}

 

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

. Digital Health Funding Database. Rock Health, LLC. Accessed 28 August, 2018.

https://rockhealth.com/data/funding-raw-data/.

. Fani Marvasti, F. & Stafford, R. S. From sick care to health care-reengineering

prevention into the U.S. system. N. Engl. J. Med. 367, 889-891 (2012).

. Pryor, K. & Volpp, K. Deployment of preventive interventions- time for a paradigm

shift. N. Engl. J. Med. 378, 1761-1763 (2018).

. Scitovsky, A. “The high cost of dying”: what do the data show? Milbank Q 83,

825-841 (2005).

. National Institutes of Health. Estimates of Funding for Various Research, Condition,

and Disease Categories. https://report.nih.gov/categorical_spending.aspx. Acces-
sed 15 August, 2019.

. Russell, L. B. Preventing chronic disease: an important investment, but don’t

count on cost savings. Health Aff. 28, 42-45 (2009).

. Chung, S. et al. Medicare annual preventive care visits: use increased among fee-for-

service patients, but many do not participate. Health Aff. (Millwood) 34, 11-20 (2015).
Dewilde, L. F. & Russell, C. The “welcome to medicare” physical: a great oppor-
tunity for our seniors. CA Cancer J. Clin. 54, 292-294 (2004).

Knowler, W. C. et al. Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with lifestyle
intervention or metformin. N. Engl. J. Med. 346, 393-403 (2002).

Chiang, |. The pursuit of a 10X better value-based care enablement solution and
the rise of primary care physician management platforms. mobihealthnewscom.
December 2019. https://mobihealthnews.com/news/pursuit-10x-better-value-
based-care-enablement-solution-and-rise-primary-care-physician. Accessed 2
February, 2020.

Chiang, |. The rise of value-based care and the pursuit of 10x better solutions.
www.medium.com. 2 December, 2019. https://medium.com/@lanEChiang/the-
rise-of-value-based-care-and-the-pursuit-of-10x-better-solutions-59eee0beb965.
Accessed 2 February, 2020.

Shrank, W. H., Rogstad, T. L. & Parekh, N. Waste in the US health care system:
estimated costs and potential for savings. JAMA 322, 1501-1509 (2019).

Girard, D. E., Nardone, D. A., Hickam, D. H. & Goldfarb, T. Estimating the attri-
butable cost of physician burnout in the United States. Ann. Intern. Med. 171,
600-600 (2019).

Lantz, P. M. The medicalization of population health: who will stay upstream?.
Milbank Q. 97, https://www.milbank.org/quarterly/articles/the-medicalization-of-
population-health-who-will-stayupstream/ (2019).

Smith, B. J., Tang, K. C. & Nutbeam, D. WHO health promotion glossary: new
terms. Health Promot. Int. 21, 340-345 (2006).

Safavi, K., Mathews, S. C., Bates, D. W., Dorsey, E. R. & Cohen, A. B. Top-funded
digital health companies and their impact on high-burden, high-cost conditions.
Health Aff. 38, 115-123 (2019).

Piwek, L., Ellis, D. A., Andrews, S. & Joinson, A. The rise of consumer health
wearables: promises and barriers. PLoS Med. 13, e1001953 (2016).

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2078 Device Approvals. (U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, 2019). https://fda.gov/medical-devices/recently-approved-devices/
2018-device-approvals. Accessed 19 July, 2019.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2019 Device Approvals. (U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, 2019). https://fda.gov/medical-devices/recently-approved-devices/
2019-device-approvals. Accessed 19 July, 2019.

Dorsey, E. R., Glidden, A. M., Holloway, M. R., Birbeck, G. L. & Schwamm, L. H.
Teleneurology and mobile technologies: the future of neurological care. Nat. Rev.
Neurol. 14, 285-297 (2018).

Boot, W. R. & Kramer, A. F. The brain-games conundrum: does cognitive training
really sharpen the mind? Cerebrum 15, (2014).

Luik, A. |., Kyle, S. D. & Espie, C. A. Digital Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (dCBT) for
insomnia: a state-of-the-science review. Curr. Sleep. Med. Rep. 3, 48-56 (2017).
Islami, F. et al. Proportion and number of cancer cases and deaths attributable to
potentially modifiable risk factors in the United States. CA Cancer J. Clin. 68,
31-54 (2018).

Khan, N., Marvel, F. A., Wang, J. & Martin, S. S. Digital health technologies to promote
lifestyle change and adherence. Curr. Treat. Options Cardiovasc. Med. 19, 60 (2017).
Topol, E. Deep medicine: how artificial intelligence can make healthcare human
again. 1st edn (NY, 2019). https://www.amazon.com/Deep-Medicine-Artificial-
Intelligence-Healthcare/dp/1541644638.

Topol, E. J. High-performance medicine: the convergence of human and artificial
intelligence. Nat. Med. 25, 44-56 (2019).

Kiranyaz, S., Ince, T. & Gabbouj, M. Real-time patient-specific ECG classification by
1-D convolutional neural networks. /EEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 63, 664-675 (2016).
Abdolmanafi, A., Cheriet, F., Duong, L. & Dahdah, N. Deep feature learning for
automatic tissue classification of coronary artery using optical coherence tomo-
graphy. Biomed. Opt. Express 8, 1203-1220 (2017).

Bumgarner, J. M. et al. Smartwatch algorithm for automated detection of atrial
fibrillation. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 71, 2381-2388 (2018).

Perez, M. V. et al. Large-scale assessment of a smartwatch to identify atrial
fibrillation. N. Engl. J. Med. 381, 1909-1917 (2019).

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 68
Np)

A.B. Cohen et al.

 

10

33. Ballinger, B. et al. DeepHeart: semi-supervised sequence learning for cardiovas-
cular risk prediction. Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (New
Orleans, Louisiana, USA, 2018).

34. Day, S & Zweig, M. Funding Part 2: Seven More Takeaways from Digital Health's
$8.16 Year. https://rockhealth.com/reports/seven-more-takeaways-from-digital-
healths-8-1b-year/">https://rockhealth.com/reports/seven-more-takeaways-from-
digital-healths-8-1b-year/. Accessed 19 Jun 2019.

35. Mehrotra, A. et al. Utilization of telemedicine among rural medicare beneficiaries.
JAMA 315, 2015-2016 (2016).

36. Shah, S. J. et al. Virtual visits partially replaced in-person visits in an ACO-based
medical specialty practice. Health Aff. (Millwood) 37, 2045-2051 (2018).

37. Kepplinger, J. et al. Safety and efficacy of thrombolysis in telestroke: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Neurology 87, 1344-1351 (2016).

38. Hilty, D. M. et al. The effectiveness of telemental health: a 2013 review. Telemed. J.
E Health 19, 444-454 (2013).

39. Anthes, E. Mental health: there’s an app for that. Nature 532, 20-23 (2016).

40. Dorr, M., Nohturfft, V. & Brasier, N. et al. The WATCH AF trial: SmartWATCHes for
detection of atrial fibrillation. JACC Clin. Electrophysiol. 5, 199-208 (2019).

41. Walsh, J. A. Topol, E. J. & Steinhubl, S. R. Novel wireless devices for cardiac
monitoring. Circulation 130, 573-581 (2014).

42. Jerant, A. F., Azari, R., Martinez, C. & Nesbitt, T. S. A randomized trial of telenursing
to reduce hospitalization for heart failure: patient-centered outcomes and nur-
sing indicators. Home Health Care Serv. 22, 1-20 (2008).

43. Martin, S. S. et al. mActive: a randomized clinical trial of an automated
mHealth intervention for physical activity promotion. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 4,
S76 (2015).

44. Widmer, R. J. et al. Digital health interventions for the prevention of cardiovas-
cular disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Mayo Clin. Proc. 90, 469-480
(2015).

45. npd. Dollar Sales of Smartwatches in the U.S. Are Up 51 Percent, Totaling Nearly $5
Billion. February (2019). https://npd.com/wps/portal/npd/us/news/press-releases/
2019/us-smartwatch-sales-see-strong-gains-according-to-new-npd-report/.
Accessed 17 March, 2019.

46. Gandhi M & Evans B. What Digital Health Is (and Isn’t). Rock Health. 5 April, 2013
(updated 2017). https://rockhealth.com/what-digital-health-is-and-isnt/. Accessed
19 July, 2019.

47. American Medical Association. Digital Health Study: Physicians’ Motivations and
Requirements for Adopting Digital Clinical Tools. (American Medical Association,
Washington DC, 2016).

48. US Food & Drug Administration. Digital Health Criteria. (US Food & Drug
Administration, Washington DC, September 2017). — https://fda.gov/
MedicalDevices/DigitalHealth/ucm575766.htm. Accessed 19 July, 2019.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Dr. Christine Krueger at Johns Hopkins Hospital, Dr. Brock Wester of the
Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, and the research team at Rock
Health, including Megan Zweig and Sean Day.

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 68

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

A.B.C. and K.S. conceived of the concept for this paper. A.B.C. and K.S. performed the
data analyses. All authors reviewed the data analyses, advanced the concepts within
the paper, and drafted the manuscript.

COMPETING INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing non-financial interests but the following
competing financial interests: D.W.B. consults for EarlySense, receives cash
compensation from CDI (Negev), Ltd., and receives equity from ValeraHealth, Clew,
MDClone. E.R.D. is a member of the medical advisory board of and owns stock
options in Grand Rounds, consults for MC10, and has research grants related to
telehealth from AbbVie, Burroughs Wellcome Fund, Greater Rochester Health
Foundation, the National Institutes of Health, the Patient-Centered Outcomes
Research Institute, and the Safra Foundation. K.S. receives equity in Position Health.
A.B.C. consults for Pear Therapeutics and Thirty Madison and has stock options in
the later.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41746-020-02 76-9.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.B.C.

Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons

7 Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.

© The Author(s) 2020

Scripps Research Translational Institute
