Data Science and Engineering (2020) 5:433-447
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41019-020-00135-z

-)

Check for
updates

GARG: Anonymous Recommendation of Point-of-Interest in Mobile
Networks by Graph Convolution Network

Shiwen Wu'?® - Yuanxing Zhang? : Chengliang Gao? - Kaigui Bian? - Bin Cui’?

Received: 27 February 2020 / Revised: 3 June 2020 / Accepted: 2 July 2020 / Published online: 29 July 2020
© The Author(s) 2020

Abstract

The advances of mobile equipment and localization techniques put forward the accuracy of the location-based service (LBS)
in mobile networks. One core issue for the industry to exploit the economic interest of the LBSs is to make appropriate point-
of-interest (POI) recommendation based on users’ interests. Today, the LBS applications expect the recommender systems
to recommend the accurate next POI in an anonymous manner, without inquiring users’ attributes or knowing the detailed
features of the vast number of POIs. To cope with the challenge, we propose a novel attentive model to recommend appropri-
ate new POIs for users, namely Geographical Attentive Recommendation via Graph (GARG), which takes full advantage of
the collaborative, sequential and content-aware information. Unlike previous strategies that equally treat POIs in the sequence
or manually define the relationships between POIs, GARG adaptively differentiates the relevance of POIs in the sequence
to the prediction, and automatically identifies the POI-wise correlation. Extensive experiments on three real-world datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of GARG and reveal a significant improvement by GARG on the precision, recall and mAP
metrics, compared to several state-of-the-art baseline methods.

1 Introduction reviewing service and check-in service, which greatly facili-

tate the process for people to acquire the information and

In the past decade, the advance of mobile computing tech-
niques has led to the widespread popularity of location-
based service (LBS) in mobile networks. Many companies
have launched LBS applications over mobile devices such
as electronic map service, online ride-hailing service, online

b<} Bin Cui
bin.cui @pku.edu.cn

Shiwen Wu
wushw. 18 @pku.edu.cn

Yuanxing Zhang
longo @pku.edu.cn

Chengliang Gao
gaochengliang @pku.edu.cn
Kaigui Bian

bkg @pku.edu.cn

' Room 1326, Science Building No.1, Peking University, No.5
YiHeYuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing, China

National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Analysis
and Applications, Peking University, Beijing, China

3 Key Lab of High Confidence Software Technologies (MOE),
Department of Computer Science, Peking University,
Beying, China

to access the wanted service. Among all of LBS applica-
tions, one of the key techniques is the next Point-of-Interest
(POI) recommendation that seeks to accurately predict the
POI where a user is interested in or she/he may visit in the
future[1].

The spatial information (1.e., the located latitude—longi-
tudes) and temporal information (i.e., timestamps) play a
very important role in the next POI recommendation in the
LBS applications when compared to the recommendation
for common items[2, 3]. Note that people’s trajectories in a
short period are always within a small region, and they tend
to focus on several main POIs (e.g., home and company) in
many daily scenarios. Typically, there are three most practi-
cal features in the POI recommendation in LBS applications.

1. The content information helps identify the correlation
among users such as attributes[4, 5], and the correlation
among POIs such as distances[6], such that the recom-
mendation can be conducted upon the correlations or
similarities of users and POIs.

2. The collaborative information contributes to the fac-
torization-based POI recommendation strategies, which

Q) Springer
434

locate the possibly interesting POIs by the historical
implicit feedback[7, 8].

3. The sequence information captures the users’ moving
patterns and their preferences[9], where the spatial-tem-
poral features can be appended for task-aware optimiza-
tion[ 10-12].

The advances of localization and navigation techniques have
helped in acquiring the high-precision position of users and
a huge mass of “check-in” data[13], which facilitate the data
analysis regarding the above three features. For instance, a
typical way is to extract a user’s moving patterns, identify
their travel interests via the session of latitude—longitude
traces, and showcase the sequence of POIs that the user
has visited, from the set of “check-in” data[ 14]. Then, it is
feasible to learn descriptive embeddings for modeling the
geographical attributes[15] and to take advantage of the
advanced recurrent neural networks[16] for exploiting the
sequence information for next POI recommendation.

However, many state-of-the-art recommender systems
do not work well for the next POI recommendation task,
when certain important data is missing (e.g., missing the
data of various moving patterns), which raises four types
of challenges.

1. Lack of User Attributes For privacy concerns, many
LBS applications do not require users to log in or reg-
ister specific attributes. Instead, the server allocates a
unique ID to each client and stores the records in cook-
ies.

2. Lack of POI Labels There can be a vast number of POIs
that may attract users, while it is not possible to obtain
comprehensive labels for all the POIs. For instance, the
label of a POI can be a restaurant, shopping mall, office
building, hospital, etc.

3. Discontinuous Mobility Traces People travel from one
POI to another, whereas the mobility traces only expose
partial observations of the entire trajectory.

4. Various Mobility Patterns. People have various mobil-
ity patterns due to their different capabilities of traveling
over distance (e.g., travel within a small region, or over
a wide range). It is necessary to learn the mobility pat-
terns and infer the user preferences within the sessions
of observations.

These four challenges are common in the anonymous LBS
applications, and thus the anonymous recommendation of
POI should be addressed to provide the next POI for users.

In this paper, we propose the Geographical Attentive
Recommendation via Graph (GARG) for the task of the
anonymous recommendation of POI, which combines the
state-of-the-art attention mechanism and the graph con-
volution network (GCN) to address the above challenges.

Q) Springer

S. Wu et al.

Specifically, we implement a collaborative preference mod-
ule in GARG to learn the embeddings as the user attributes
over the collaborative information. Besides, GARG employs
a geographical preference module to investigate the content-
aware information and overcome the lack of labels, where
GCN is leveraged upon the content information, 1.e., dis-
tance, between each pair of POIs to adaptively identify the
correlations. Beyond that, we utilize a gated recurrent unit
(GRU) network with attention mechanism in the geographi-
cal preference module to tackle the discontinuous observa-
tions and recognize the mobility patterns via the sequence
information. Overall, we make the following contributions
in this work.

e Data-Driven Approach We observe from the real-world
check-in data that people have their own mobility pat-
terns and they tend to visit a series of POIs within a cer-
tain area.

e Automatic Identification of Geographical Influence
Previous works design different functions over distances
between paired POIs to model the influence of historical
POIs on the objective. GARG automatically learns POI
correlation from location data and mass of check-ins.

e Efficiently Capture Users’ Current Activity Area
Users’ check-ins cover a long range of time. Some might
move to another city and some might temporarily travel
far away. GARG can adaptively differentiate the contri-
bution of historical POIs and efficiently recognize users’
current activity areas.

We conduct evaluations over three real-world datasets with
various moving patterns to compare the performance of
GARG with several state-of-the-art POI recommendation
strategies. Experimental results confirm that GARG makes a
remarkable improvement in the precision and recall metrics,
while the fine-grained analyses indicate that the modules of
GARG all contribute to the recommendation task. Further-
more, GARG can be easily embedded into existing mobile
applications for improving customer satisfaction owing to
its generality and efficiency.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Related
works are introduced in Sect. 2. In Sect. 3, we analyze the
characteristics of data from three LBS applications and
point out the aspects to be considered in the next POI rec-
ommendation. Section 4 presents the overview of the GARG
architecture and explains the rationality of each compo-
nent. Experimental results and conclusions are provided in
Sects. 5 and 6, respectively.
GARG: Anonymous Recommendation of Point-of-Interest in Mobile Networks by Graph Convolution... 435

2 Related Work

Due to the widespread use of recommender systems in
mobile LBS applications, researchers have proposed efficient
recommendation strategies using either the implicit feedback
or the sequences of POIs.

POI Recommendation by Implicit Feedback Some POI
recommender systems equally treat the POIs in the historical
traces of users as the implicit feedback and attempt to learn
the embeddings via reconstruction of these implicit feed-
back records[17]. Based on the naive probabilistic matrix
factorization methods[18], many works focus on involving
extended features for improvement on accuracy. Regarding
learning the user embeddings, existing works are conducted
under the assumption that users may present similar inter-
ests with those sharing the same attributes[19]. In terms of
the POI embeddings, the most significant issue is to model
the geographical similarity or influence[8, 20] between each
pair of POIs. Besides, UCF+G[21], Rank-GeoFM[22] and
GeolE[6] assume that POIs with close distance share strong
correlation, and retrieve the geographical influence by the
manually defined functions over distances. Moreover, due to
the spatial-clustering phenomenon in the POI recommenda-
tion, researchers pay attention to inferring users’ activity
areas from their historical behavior. MGMPFM[23] utilizes
the multi-center Gaussian model to learn regions of activity,
GeoMF[24] introduces activity vectors of users and influ-
ence vectors of POIs to augment factorization model and
Geo-ALM[25] fuses users’ preferences for the POIs and the
regions that the POIs belong to. Recent works consider the
user-POI interactions, POI-POI relations and other infor-
mation such as social relationship, in the view of graphs.
HRec[26] leverages social relationship to enhance user rep-
resentations and adopts graph learning approach to learn
the user/POI representations from three graphs. JUGE[27]
jointly learns the embedding from six graphs of the user-
POI-Time period relationships. However, these methods
fail to learn the sequence information and may lose efficacy
when the attribute features are absent.

POI Recommendation by Sequence Recently, many
researchers notice the importance of sequence information
for recommending POIs[15, 28, 29]. In addition to the con-
text information contained in the sequence, time interval
and spatial transformation should not be ignored as well.
Some researchers try to model spatio-temporal context and
sequence information by augmenting traditional matrix
factorization[30]. STELLAR[31] extends matrix factoriza-
tion by time vectors to explicitly model the POI-time inter-
actions. Inspired by the great success of the sequence to
sequence model in the natural language processing, there
have been efforts resorted to the recurrent neural networks.
ST-RNN[32] adapts RNN structure to model local temporal

and spatial contexts with time-specific transition matrices
for different time-intervals and distance-specific transition
matrices for different geographical distances. Beyond the
legacy long-short term memory (LSTM)[33] network, ST-
LSTM[12] proposes a new recurrent cell with time-aware
and space-aware gates owing to spatio-temporal charac-
teristics. TMCA[34] introduces the attention mechanism
to learn the weights over each POI in the traces and pro-
duces the prediction under the consideration of some POIs
with high weights. Further, GT-HAN[35, 36] adopts the
attention mechanism to capture the geographical relations
and employs bi-LSTM to capture sequence dependence.
Some works utilize side information, such as comments, to
enhance the user/POI representations. NEXT[29] incorpo-
rates meta-data information, time interval and visit time, and
leverages the DeepWalk method to encode such knowledge.
MMR[37] employs graph embedding technique to learn
embeddings from heterogeneous graph, and adopts LSTM
with attention to capture sequence pattern. Although these
strategies are adept at representing the sequences, a major
issue is that they do not make full use of the collaborative
information to identify the POI-wise correlation.

The GARG proposed in this paper fills this gap via a com-
prehensive consideration of both the collaborative informa-
tion and the sequence information, and therefore the perfor-
mance can be further improved.

3 Measurements and Observations
over Anonymous LBS Datasets

In this section, we discuss the characteristics of data from
LBS applications and show the aspects to be considered in
the POI recommendation. Previous works have pointed out
the “clustering phenomenon” that people tend to visit places
concentrated in a region especially within a short period. In
addition, many users routinely revisit familiar places while
exploring new places in their living area simultaneously.
Moreover, users’ preference for POIs is a unity of common
and personality.

Anonymous LBS Datasets We use three real-world data-
sets to investigate the user behaviors and mobility patterns
within the LBS applications.

© Gowalla'[{14] records the traces of users on POIs from 7
main categories, 1.e., Community, Entertainment, Food,
Nightlife, Outdoors, Shopping and Travel. It can be

 http://www.yongliu.org/datasets/.

Q) Springer
436

10.0

75

5.0

pdf (%)

2.5

0.0 0.2 0.4

Fig. 1 Distribution of trajectory similarity on Gowalla

20
xs
on
go)
10
0 01 02
Sim.

Fig. 2 Distribution of trajectory similarity on Foursquare

inferred that the dataset tends to describe users’ interests
via the sessions of traces.

e Foursquare’[38] contains check-in traces in New York,
which is originally used for studying the spatial-temporal
regularity of user activity in LBS networks.

e Brightkite*[2] was proposed to analyze users’ mobility
patterns, exposing that users move back and forth among
a few of POIs.

The last two datasets expose users’ habits more than their
interests; meanwhile, Foursquare tends to have a shorter
average distance of POI traces than Brightkite. These three
datasets are the most commonly used anonymous datasets
for POI-recommendation, where the user attributes are not
provided and the annotations to POIs are not available in
all datasets.

Observation 1 There are clustering effects among
users’ POI trajectories. The basic assumption behind col-
laborative filtering is that users with similar preferences
might be interested in similar items. We adopt the Jaccard
similarity coefficient as depicted by Eq. | to measure the
similarity of users’ trajectories:

[Py Py, |

iP, uP, | (1)

Sim(u,, Uj) =

* https://sites.google.com/site/yangdingqi/home/foursquare-dataset.
3 https://www.cs.cornell.edu/~arb/data/spatial-Brightkite/index.html.

D) Springer

S. Wu et al.

10

pdf (%)

0.2 0.4
Sim.

Fig.3 Distribution of trajectory similarity on Brightkite

0.15

Similarity
oS
>

0.05

 

0 10 20 30 40
Distance

Fig.4 Correlation of distance and similarity of POI trajectories
between users

where P,, 1s the set of POIs visited by user u;. For each user,
we take the average similarity to five users with the most
similar POI trajectories (highest Jaccard similarity coeffi-
cient values) as the user-specific similarity index. Figures 1,
2 and 3 depict the distribution of the similarity on three
datasets, respectively, indicating that for each user, we can
always find users with relatively similar trajectories. There-
fore, collaborative filtering works to some degree for infer-
ring the POIs which users would be potentially interested in.
Besides, we take a further look at the correlation between
similarity and distance between the estimated activity center.
We take the average latitude and longitude of visited POIs
as users’ activity center and calculate the geographical dis-
tance between centers. Given the latitude and longitude of
two points P, (/ng,, lat,), P.(ing,, lat,), the distance between
them is calculated as follows[21]:

— (90.0 — lat,) x —~, — (90.0 — lat,) x —2—
1 = ( at)X Teog? P2 = a) X Te 9
6,=!l x _7 5 6, =1 x _7
P= MS1* Teg Q7 72 ~ 'M52* 7 a0 0
dist(P,,P,) = R, X arccos (sin d, sin d, cos (8, — 8,) + cos d, cos dp)

(2)
GARG: Anonymous Recommendation of Point-of-Interest in Mobile Networks by Graph Convolution... 437

1.0
0.063 0.12 0.13 0.19 0.19 0.2 0.23 0.24 0.26 0.26

   
 
 
   

0.1 0.18 0.24 0.26 0.35 0.29
0.8
0.14 0.22 0.28
0.17 0.25 0.32 0.37 Kievé 0.37 0.56 RIKS}
0.6
0.2 i 0.35 ; et 0.37

0.22 0. ).38 : ROD

Frequency

0.4

 

0.24 0.33. 0.63

0.26 H a A

- 0.2
0.27 0.3 - Bee 0.66
0.29 : 0.73 t Rs

- 0.0

0.055 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.28 0.14 0.2 0.24 0.17 0.11

Expected frequency of 10 POIs

Fig.5 The column-wise cumulative probabilities of the most fre-
quently visited 10 POIs from 10 randomly selected users. Each row
represents the data of a selected user, and each column corresponds
to one of the POIs. The expected frequency of 10 POIs under uniform
distribution assumption is also given in the last row

where R, is the radius of earth, i.e., 6371km. As shown
in Fig. 4, it is reasonable to infer that users with higher
similarity might live in the same neighborhood with high
probability.

Observation 2 Users tend to present revisiting behaviors
and various mobility patterns. The decisions of people can
be categorized into exploration and exploitation. Regard-
ing general items such as movies, people hardly watch one
movie repeatedly but tend to explore new ones. On the con-
trary, we find out that most people not only try to explore
unvisited places but also frequently revisit familiar places.

We randomly select 10 users from the Foursquare data-
set and depict the cumulative probabilities of their most
frequently visited 10 POIs in Fig. 5 by columns. We also

Fig.6 Repeat visiting behaviors Campus —
to familiar POIs Building =
Bakery -

Drugstore / Pharmacy -
Home (private) -
Airport -

Train Station -
Medical Center -

Diner -

Clothing Store -
Outdoors & Recreation -
Office -

Theater -

Park -

Coffee Shop -

Stadium -

Bar -

Restaurant -

Food & Drink Shop -

Other Places — Wm iil I!

present the expected frequency (probability) of 10 POIs if
users would visit POIs in a uniform distribution, as shown
in the last row of Fig. 5. Results reveal a big gap between
the cumulative probabilities of 10 POIs under real-world
scenario and uniform distribution, indicating that users tend
to have revisiting behaviors in real life.

Observation 3 There are usually main interests within the
POI trajectories, while the POI trajectories are usually moni-
tored discretely and partially. Different users have their own
preferences in visiting different kinds of places. We analyze
users’ visiting frequency of different types of POIs. We ran-
domly sample 100 users from Foursquare dataset and summa-
rize the number of visiting times to different types of places.
Figure 6 shows the proportion of different types of places vis-
ited by users, respectively. For simplification, we only keep
the 19 most popular types and categorize the remaining into
“Other Places”. For example, we can see that some users might
be students or teaching staffs since they always go to campus
and some might be in the habit of exercising for their frequent
visit to the stadium. It is worth noting that not all users fre-
quently go back home according to the check-ins. The reason
might be that the LBS application only captures users’ partial
trajectories, which raises the difficulty of extracting users’
mobility patterns and inferring sequence behavior.

4 Anonymous Recommendation of POI
by GARG

Based on the three observations in Sect. 3, we introduce a
novel recommender system, named Geographical Attentive
Recommendation via Graph (GARG) for addressing the chal-
lenges in recommending POIs in anonymous LBS applica-
tions. GARG consists of two modules: (1) the collaborative
preference module learns the interest-aware embeddings and
attempts to model the general user/POI preference via the col-
laborative information; and (2) the geographical preference

1.0
|

0.6

\EEEWREE HIME T gy

D) Springer
438

I ee ee ee el

 

S. Wu et al.

Yup = Vip =o

meme ee my

 

 

o

7 Geographical

Preference Module | Sequence

representation —

  
  

BC CN, )
Qj C;

Attention layer
l= “4

GRU layer

Embedding layer

 

g
Two-layer GCN “By

sen —*Ccn,,

q Pizza P

it aan 2

mcm eee

 

|
|
‘

LQ |

Restaurant

Collaborative
, Preference Module ,

@

eee

 

—— ee ee ee eee ee ee

Fig.7 The architecture of GARG, consisting of a collaborative preference module and a geographical preference module

module manages the sequential and the content-aware infor-
mation for identifying location-based geographical correlation
among POIs. Figure 7 presents an overview of GARG, and the
detailed design will be presented in this section.

4.1 Problem Statement

Suppose the set of users and POIs on the LBS platform are
denoted by U and P, respectively. For each POI p € P, the
only accessible feature is the geographical coordinates 6,
of latitude and longitude. We can then retrieve the physical
distance d,,,, between POI p and POI p’ and construct the
adjacency matrix Ap based on the distance between each pair
of POIs. Let H,, = [x1,%,..., xy | represent the sequence of
POIs visited by user u € U with length N,, in a chronologi-
cal order. A POI recommender system is expected to rec-
ommend several POIs for each user u which she/he will be
interested in but has not visited yet.

4.2 Embedding Layer

We are going to project the user preferences into latent space
of dimensionality h, where each user u € U corresponds to
an embedding vector g, € R”. Meanwhile, we transform the
POIs into embeddings from the same latent space, and thus
we could measure similarity and correlation between users
and POIs or between pairs of POIs by dot-product. Specifi-
cally, we build two sets of embeddings for the POIs, namely
the preference embeddings, denoted as l, for p € P, and the
geographical influenced embeddings, denoted as g, for
p € P, to capture the collaborative aspect and the content
aspect of POIs. Therefore, the historical POI sequence H,,

D) Springer

can be transformed into a sequence of embeddings
EF, = [ho by> Le |

4.3 Collaborative Preference Module

Many works regard the users’ check-in records as implicit
feedback, and they assume that if user u once visited POI p,
the probability that u is interested in p is quite high. Under
this assumption, the POI recommendation task turns into a
classic recommendation problem, 1.e., to learn representa-
tive user embeddings and POI embeddings for the optimal
implicit feedback reconstruction. Specifically, we map the
users and POIs into embeddings of the latent vectors, 1.e., ¢,
and /,, to represent the user w’s characteristics and POI p’s
features, respectively. We keep the embeddings normalized,
and we leverage the inner product of q,, and /, to measure the
general preference of user u to POI p without explicitly tak-
ing spatio-temporal constraint into consideration, named as
the collaborative preference. Let Yop denote the collaborative
preference between user u and POI p, which is computed by

C _
Vip = Iu lp: (3)

4.4 Geographical Preference Module

Sequence information in POI recommendation. The col-
laborative information generates the latent feature vectors
of users and POIs based on the user-POI visiting history,
which only records the preference/interaction frequency of
users on POIs. However, the schemes have not taken user
mobility patterns on POIs into account. Besides, the order
GARG: Anonymous Recommendation of Point-of-Interest in Mobile Networks by Graph Convolution... 439

of POIs users visited contains rich information about the
correlation/similarity between POIs. Owing to the mobility
patterns of the individual user or the private user interests,
POIs appearing under similar contexts usually tend to be
more similar. Furthermore, we observe that the latest activ-
ity area of users would be an essential factor for reducing
the number of candidate POIs, as people may not frequently
visit POIs far away.

Learning sequential features by GRU. To take full
advantage of the sequence information, we apply the recur-
rent neural network to extract sequence information and
recurrently propagate the evidence for inferring the users’
mobility patterns and interests. Specifically, we leverage the
advanced gated recurrent unit (GRU) network to tackle the
sequential data, 1.e.,

c; = GRU(c_1, 1,307"), (4)

where c, stands for the cell state at the i-th position of the
sequence, and O°" represents the trainable parameters of
the GRU cell with dimensionality of h. We could then evalu-
ate the preference of user u to POI p from the sequential
aspect by the dot-product.

Learning sequence representations by attention. How-
ever, aS we do not have access to the explicit attitudes of
a user to POIs from the implicit feedback sequence, some
POIs in the sequence may not have strong correlation with
the prediction of future POIs, such as the POIs that impose
negative impression to the user, or the POIs that the user just
visited by chance. The naive GRU network cannot identify
and skip the impact of these irrelevant POIs. Inspired by
the great success of the neural translation techniques[39],
we adopt the attention mechanism over the GRU network to
extract the information behind the sequence. The attention
mechanism assigns various weights to the POIs at different
positions and computes the weighted sum of the outputs of
all positions to be the representation of the sequence. We use
GRU to capture the sequential behavior at first, as depicted
by Eq. (4). GARG further adopts an item-level attention
mechanism with parameter W“ to analyze to what extent
the output of the last position of GRU attend to the outputs
at the other positions, and probe into the important POIs for
the prediction.

Ty7A
c, Wey, 6)
Qa; =
Ny
Di Cy WAcy,
N,
Sy = QaiC; (6)

Il
—

where s, indicates the sequence representation, and a;
(i € {1,2,...,N,}) stands for the weight at each position.
The rationale behind this design is that we assume the most
recent POI will roughly limit the mobility regions of the
user, while some of the previous POIs implicitly depict her
mobility pattern and interest.

Content-aware correlation between POIs. Intuitively,
people are likely to know the POIs around those they once
visited and the premise for users to visit new POIs is to
know those places. Hence, people within the region would
have a high probability of visiting them one after another. It
is essential to pay attention to POIs’ influential power and
model the potential strong correlation with their neighbors.
As we only have access to the latitude—longitude of these
POIs, the most significant factor to model the correlation
between pairs of POIs is the distance. We could construct
the geographical graph and extract the adjacent measure-
ment matrix Ap by the distances, where each element of Ap
is computed by:

2

Cae
PP !
Ay _ exp(— > )P 4 DP and dy =e€

(7)

0 otherwise

where the distance d,,,, is calculated by Eq. 2, and the o and
€ are thresholds to control the scope and degree of influence,
the closer the distance, the greater the influence. Assuming
that the content-aware correlation is negatively correlated
to the distance, many researchers have manually proposed
mapping relations to compute the influence[6, 12]. How-
ever, they ignore the fact that the attributes of the POIs,
which can be represented by the sequential features and the
collaborative embeddings, also determine the correlation
between POIs.

Learning Content-Aware Correlation by GCN To take
full advantage of the content-aware correlation and the col-
laborative information of POIs, we use the advanced Graph
Convolutional Network (GCN)[40] to model the geographi-
cal influence of the neighboring POIs for each POI p € P.
GCN in GARG is built upon the adjacent measurement
matrix Ap, and learns the geographical features by integrat-
ing the knowledge from neighboring POIs. Each layer of
GCN propagates the knowledge from each POI to its one-
hop neighbors (1.e., the corresponding adjacent value greater
than zero). Regarding the k-th layer of the GCN, it main-
tains trainable parameter W“ and generates the output G™,
following:

G® = ReLU(D-2AD-iG* W), (8)

where A = Ap + Ip, 1s the adjacent matrix with added self-
connections, I P| is the identity matrix, and D is a diagonal

matrix, Dyp = Der App: Note that the embeddings of the

Q) Springer
440

GCN component G is initialized by the preference embed-
dings. Empirically, the correlation between pairs of POIs
decays along with the length of the propagation route in the
geographical graph between them. In this paper, we apply
a two-layer GCN for GARG to capture the content-aware
correlation, namely g, € G® for p € P. Therefore, instead
of merely using the sequence information, we could measure
the preference of user u to POI p by combining the sequence
information of the historical check-ins and the content-aware
correlation, namely

Vip = Sul 8p- (9)

4.5 Optimization

To measure the intention that user u would like to visit a
target POI p, we take both the collaborative preference and
geographical preference into account, namely
Yup = Nip + BY ny» (10)
where f is a trainable factor to find the balance between
these two types of preferences. Under various scenarios, f
would be different to cope with the sequences in the datasets.
We apply negative sampling to prevent overfitting on the
historical sequences and enhance the representing capabil-
ity of the embeddings. We organize the loss function as the
negative likelihood:

(1o8(6(),))) + log = o6,9)))

CUM) =~ Qe dy OIF,

ucU peH,
(11)
where p represents one negative randomly sampled POI rela-
tive to the existing POIs at each position of the sequence
H,, and o(-) is the sigmoid function. Considering that the
negative sampling strategies do impact the performance of
the model, we investigate the different sampling methods in
Sect. 5.4. We adopt the Adam algorithm to adjust the learn-
ing rate for minimizing this likelihood objective function. To
prevent overfitting, during each iteration, we re-sample the
negative samples randomly and construct the negative set.
We pretrain the embeddings of users and POIs with matrix
factorization method. In this paper, we fix the dimensionality
of all latent embeddings, 1.e., h, as 128.

4.6 Analytical Results
We then analyze the outputs of GARG to show whether the

prediction of GARG is feasible. Specifically, we find that
GARG can precisely identify the preferences of users, and

Q) Springer

S. Wu et al.

yield the POIs that are reachable by the users. The analytical
results are mainly two-fold:

Proposition 1 Given two POIs that are identical except for
distance, GARG recommends the one near the users’ recent
activity area.

Proof User u’s preference score for POI p is the combination
of general preference and geographical preference. Under
the assumption that the two POIs are identical other than
distance, the general preference part Yop should be equal.
Considering the geographical preference part, the sequence
representation s,, attentively aggregates the sequence infor-
mation from u’s historical trajectories which reflects her
recent activity area, while the g, =f (p' € N,,) integrates the
POIs from its neighborhood. Thus, the geographical prefer-
ence score should be higher if p belongs to the w’s recent
activity area. oO

Proposition 2 GARG falls into sequence model category but
fuses geographical information.

Proof The classical sequence model combines general pref-
erence and sequential preference. FPMC[41] consists of the
inner product of user and item factors (capturing general
preference) and the inner product of previous and next item
factors (capturing sequential dynamics). NARM[42] only
concentrates on sequential preference and utilizes GRU
with attention mechanism to capture sequence information.
If the coefficient 6 approximates positive infinity and the
adjacent matrix is an identity matrix, GARG degenerates
into NARM. If the adjacent matrix is an identity matrix and
all the attention is on the last POI, GARG degenerates into
FPMC. However, GARG enjoys the benefits of GCN and
attention over GRU to fully capture sequence and geographi-
cal preference. oO

5 Evaluation
5.1 Setups

Datasets. We use the three real-world datasets introduced
in Sect. 3 to examine the performance of GARG. Following
the data preprocessing approach deployed by[6], we filter out
the users and items with less than 40 records for Gowalla; for
Foursquare, we filter out those with less than 10 records; for
Brightkite, we filter out the users with less than 40 records
and the items with less than 10 records. The preprocessed
datasets are split into training set, validation set and test set
with the proportion of 8:1:1 by the check-in timestamps.
As illustrated in Sect. 4.4, the adjacent measurement
matrix depends on the threshold o and € to control the scope
GARG: Anonymous Recommendation of Point-of-Interest in Mobile Networks by Graph Convolution... 441

and degree of influence. For the Gowalla and Brightkite
dataset, the threshold o and € are set to be 10 and 0.5, respec-
tively, inspired by the parameter setting in[43]. Since POIs
visited by users in Foursquare tend to concentrate in a more
narrow area, we set o to be 5 (Table 1).

Baseline methods As there have been many POI recom-
mending strategies for specific LBS applications, we select
several state-of-the-art methods to compare the performance
with GARG in our settings. For the recommendation by
implicit feedback, we run or reproduce the following eight
strategies: (1) UCF+G[21] fuses user preference and geo-
graphical influence by combining a user-based collaborative
filtering approach and a power-law function of distance to
capture check-in probability. (2) MGMPFM[23] combines a
probabilistic factor model and a multi-center Gaussian model
to learn regions of activity. (3) GeoMF[24] integrates geo-
graphical influence by modeling users’ activity regions and
pre-defined POIs’ influence areas. (4) RankGeoFM[22] is a
ranking-based MF model which uses two latent matrixes to
represent user preference and users’ geographical preference,
respectively, and includes the geographical influence of neigh-
boring POIs. (5) GeoIE[6] differentiates the impact between
each pair of POIs on bi-directions and embeds users and POIs
into latent space to calculate similarities between users and
POIs. (6) SAE-NAD[8] deploys self-attentive mechanism
to encode the session for maximizing the utilization of col-
laborative information. Regarding the recommendation by
sequence information, we examine the performance of: (7)
ST-LSTM[12] modifies the LSTM cell by integrating the
spatial gate via distance and the temporal gate via time differ-
ence between two consecutive POIs. (8) TMCA[34] applies
the attention mechanism over the recurrent neural network
to learn the session-level representation for capturing users’
mobility patterns. (9) GT-HAN[35, 36] models the geographi-
cal relations by leveraging attention mechanism and employs
bi-LSTM to capture sequence dependence. (10) NEXT[29]
models the influence of the last POI on the next move based on
the time interval and adopts DeepWalk mechanism to pretrain
the POI embeddings. These baseline methods are fine-tuned
on the validation set to ensure a fair comparison, and the per-
formance on the test set will be reported.

Evaluation Criteria We evaluate the performance of the
model and the baselines in terms of three kinds of criteria.

e Recall@K: The recall metric measures in what propor-
tion the recommendation of K POIs covers the ground
truths of the POIs that the users would visit.

e Precision@K: The precision metric indicates the propor-
tion of correct recommended POIs where the users would
visit within the K recommendations.

e mAP@K: Mean average precision (mAP) is the mean of
the average precision scores for each recommendation
of K POIs. Suppose the recommended POI with rank k

 

—*k— GARG
—> GT-HAN
0.151 UCF+G
STLSTM
—@- TMCA
—@ GeoMF
EE GeolE
-@ RankGeoFM
——~SAE-NAD

—¢ NEXT
—k— MGMPFM
0.05; —_____+

1 5 10 20
K

 

 

 

 

Fig.8 Pre@K of the compared methods on Gowalla

 

0.15;

—*k— GARG
> GT-HAN

UCF+G
STLSTM
0.10) -¢ ta
—@- GeoMF
EL GeolE
—@ RankGeoFM
—+— SAE-NAD
0.05; — NEXT

—k— MGMPFM

Rec@K

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.10 mAP@K of the compared methods on Gowalla

Table 1 Statistics of the datasets

Dataset #User #POI #Check-in Density
Gowalla 2151 5119 274037 1.141%
Foursquare 1043 3908 80297 0.9981%
Brightkite 2281 4273 305302 0.5547%

is the correct predicted POI with k’-th highest rank (k’ is
set to zero if it is not a correct prediction), the precision
score of this POI would be £. Then, the mAP score can
be defined as: E[- Yh, —}

Specifically, we set K to 1, 5, 10, 20 to measure the
performance.

Q) Springer
442

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.11 Pre@K of the compared methods on Foursquare

 

0.08:
—k— GARG
—>— GT-HAN
~ 0.06; UCF+G
&) STLSTM
—§—TMCA
—@ GeoMF
HEL GeolE

oo RankGeoFM
0.02; —\— SAE-NAD
— NEXT
—k— MGMPFM

1 5 10 20

3
ze 9.04

 

 

 

Fig.12 Rec@K of the compared methods on Foursquare

 

—k— GARG
0.06; > GT-HAN
UCF+G
STLSTM
—- TMCA
—@ GeoMF
+L GeolE
-@ RankGeoFM
—|— SAE-NAD
~~ NEXT
_—*— MGMPFM — ——____ a

  
 
   
     
 

 

 

 

Fig. 13 mAP@K of the compared methods on Foursquare

5.2 Performance of GARG

We compare the performance of GARG with the other state-
of-the-art methods based on three kinds of criteria on the
three datasets.

Geographical correlation captured by GARG. As
shown in Figs. 8,9, 10, 14, 15 and 16, GARG improves
the performance remarkably compared to the baselines on
the Gowalla and Brightkite datasets. Specifically, the Gow-
alla dataset exposes rich check-in histories of users among
nearby POIs, where the GCN can accurately capture the geo-
graphical correlation between pairs of POIs, which helps
GARG perform best on all three metrics. In contrast, the
strategies simply based on implicit feedback or sequence
information do not work well, as they could not adaptively
model the geographical influence. Meanwhile, the users
in the Brightkite dataset tend to move back and forth from

Q) Springer

S. Wu et al.

 

 
  
    

—k— GARG

—>— GT-HAN

UCF+G

0.06; STLSTM
v —@- TMCA
—@ GeoMF
© iL GeolE

oo RankGeoFM
& 0.04, —— SAE-NAD

—& NEXT
—k—- MGMPFM

 

 

 

Fig. 14 Pre@K of the compared methods on Brightkite

 

 

 

 

0.15)
—k— GARG
—>— GT-HAN
Ww | UCF+G
@ 0-10 STLSTM
oO —@- TMCA
o& —@ GeoMF
a iL GeolE
0.05; -@ RankGeoFM
—— SAE-NAD
— NEXT
—*k— MGMPFM
1 5 10 20
K

Fig.15 Rec@K of the compared methods on Brightkite

—*k— GARG
—> GT-HAN
UCF+G
0.061 STLSTM
Y —@- TMCA
©) —@ GeoMF
A. +L GeolE __
< —@-_ RankGeoFM
S 0.04; —1~ SAE-NAD 4
—4++ NEXT

—k—_ MGMPFM

 

        
 

 

 

 

Fig.16 mAP@K of the compared methods on Brightkite

several regions. The GRU network in GARG is capable of
identifying the moving patterns, and thus improves the accu-
racy of GARG by targeting the POIs from specific regions.

Collaborative Preference Correlation Captured by
GARG In addition to geographical correlation, the col-
laborative preference correlation plays an important role in
preference representation. On the Foursquare dataset, GARG
performs similarly with UCF+G, while it outperforms the
other baselines, as plotted in Figs. 11, 12 and 13. We exam-
ine the results and find that the distances between POIs of
the Foursquare dataset are far less than the other datasets.
Geographical information on the Foursquare dataset seems
to have less value, which is consistent with the result in
Sect. 5.4. In this scenario, the collaborative preference mod-
ule of GARG captures the user interests and recommends
the POIs that the users are most likely to visit. Thus, we see
that some matrix factorization-based strategies (UCF+G,
GARG: Anonymous Recommendation of Point-of-Interest in Mobile Networks by Graph Convolution... 443

X Previously visited Pols
X Recently visited Pols

¥% True positive

+. True negative

Y False positive

Now

OW
San Antonio

' ge 4

 

fie3

Austin
/ 1)

Fig.17 The prediction of GARG with ground truths over a mobility

pattern of narrow activity area

°C
Phoenix

Tucson FI Paso
X Previously visited Pols
Recently visited Pols

¥* True positive

A. True negative

Y False positive

 

United States

X... City Y

x
Dallas
©

x

¥

Ns
‘Yaustin ¥
° Houston

c
San Antonio

Fig. 18 The prediction of GARG with ground truths over a mobility

pattern of broad activity area

GeoMEF) perform quite well compared to their performance
on the other two datasets (Figs. 14, 15 and 16).

In all, the comparison over the three datasets confirms the
efficiency and accuracy of the proposed GARG.

Toronto
al 7
- Mississauga Rochester Nb
aa Londc o
Madisor Milwaukee ee adon PButfak °
hee Detroit
ck c Cc ‘
arR f Chicago 1 Arbor! y
| a ( wee Toleéo_@leveland
Naperville c New York
Cc

Peoria >
o Pittsburgh Philadelphia

a
C Columbus
Indianapolis
St. Louis
C

Louisville
Fvancville .

Norfolke Virginia Beach

Nashville Greensboro
a

Charlotte
Co

\X Previously visited Pols

| > Recently visited Pols

¥* True positive

A. True negative

| Y False positive Savannah

 

 

Fig.19 The prediction of GARG with ground truths over a mobility
pattern of changed activity area

5.3 Case Study

We sample several cases from the dataset with results pro-
vided by GARG for demonstration. Figures 17, 18 and 19
show three typical scenarios labeled with the historical
check-ins (divided into recently visited POIs and the previ-
ously visited POIs), the true-positive cases, true-negative
cases and the false-positive cases. Specifically, the user of
Fig. 17 visited POIs in a narrow range all the time and the
POIs recommended by GARG are also concentrated on that
small area; the user of Fig. 18 has a wide activity area and
GARG recommends distributed POIs with high precision;
the user of Fig. 19 has obviously changed her activity area,
while GARG realizes this scenario benefiting from the GRU
with attention mechanism and the POIs recommended by
GARG are all around her new activity areas. These examples
further illustrate that GARG 1s able to capture both collabo-
rative information and sequence information successfully
and it has the capability to automatically recognize different
scenarios.

5.4 Fine-Grained Analyses of GARG

Efficiency of the Modules in GARG In this section, we fur-
ther analyze the rationality of GARG structure by examining
the contribution of each component in GARG. We compare
the performance of GARG by removing the collaborative
preference module (denoted as GARG w/o CP), removing
the GRU (denoted as GARG w/o GRU) and removing GCN
(denoted as GARG w/o GCN), respectively. To ensure the

D) Springer
[1 GARG w/o CP

21 [= GARG w/o GRU
So

&} [=] GARG w/o GCN
vo

=

Ss §

>

2

+

—

s 4

Pre@5 Pre@20 Rec@5 Rec@20 mAP@5 mAP@20
Metrics

Fig. 20 Efficiency of modules in GARG on Gowalla
[—] GARG wio CP

[1 GARG w/o GRU
[1 GARG w/o GCN

nN

N

Metric Value (%)
_

Pre@5 Pre@20 Rec@5 Rec@20 mAP@5 mAP@20
Metrics

Fig.21 Efficiency of modules in GARG on Foursquare

LC] GARG w/o CP
(|) GARG w/o GRU
C1 GARG w/o GCN
-_) GARG

Metric Value (%)
o nn

_

 

Pre@5 Pre@20 Rec@5 Rec@20 mAP@5 mAP@20
Metrics

Fig. 22 Efficiency of modules in GARG on Brightkite

comparability, we adopt the same hyper-parameter setting
for three methods. Results are shown in Figs. 20, 21 and
22. It is evident that GARG outperforms the other three
architectures, indicating that (1) the collaborative informa-
tion and sequence information can complement each other,
(2) GRU with the attention mechanism adaptively captures
the mobility pattern contained in sequence, (3) and GCN
component automatically models the geographical influence.
Overall, this ablation study (by removing some “feature” of
the model to see how that affects performance) confirms the
ability of GARG to fully integrate the content-aware infor-
mation and sequence information.

Parameter Sensitivity In this section, we study the influ-
ence of the variable , which is the dimension of the latent

D) Springer

 

 

S. Wu et al.

Metric Value (“%)

 

Pre@5 Pre@20 Rec@5 Rec@20 mAP@5 mAP@20
Metrics

Fig. 23 Influence of latent factor dimensions in GARG on Gowalla

Metric Value (%)

 

Pre@5 Pre@20 Rec@5 Rec@20 mAP@5 mAP@20
Metrics

Fig. 24 Influence of latent factor dimensions in GARG on Foursquare

Metric Value (“%)
eo

_

 

Pre@5 Pre@20 Rec@5 Rec@20 mAP@5 mAP@20
Metrics

Fig. 25 Influence of latent factor dimensions in GARG on Brightkite

embeddings, hidden state of GRU cells and the transfor-
mation matrices. In our experiment, h is set to be 32, 64,
128 and 256, respectively. Figures 23, 24 and 25 report the
performance of GARG for the different values of / on the
three datasets, respectively. The results demonstrate that the
performance in all evaluation metrics has similar behavior
with the varying value of h. For the Gowalla and Bright-
kite datasets, the performance increases with the increase of
the / at the beginning, then achieves the best performance
when fh = 128. For the Foursquare dataset, the performance
achieves best at h = 256. Overall, we fix the parameter
h = 128.

Impact of Different RNN Cells RNN mechanism
is widely adopted to capture transition pattern from the
GARG: Anonymous Recommendation of Point-of-Interest in Mobile Networks by Graph Convolution...

LL] GARG w/ RNN
[>| GARG w/ LSTM
L] GARG

Metric Value (%)

Pre@5 Pre@20 Rec@5 Rec@20 mAP@5mAP@20
Metrics

Fig. 26 Impact of RNN cells on Gowalla

L | GARG w/ RNN
[=| GARG w/ LSTM

N

Metric Value (%)
_

Nn

 

 

 

Pre@S5 Pre@20 Rec@5 Rec@20 mAP@5 mAP@20
Metrics

Fig.27 Impact of RNN cells on Foursquare

L_] GARG w/ RNN
[55) GARG w/ LSTM

 

Metric Value (%)

 

Pre@5 Pre@20 Rec@5 Rec@20 mAP@5mAP@20
Metrics

Fig.28 Impact of RNN cells on Brightkite

sequence data. There are three common RNN cells, Le.,
vanilla RNN, LSTM and GRU. LSTM employs gating mech-
anism to alleviate the vanishing gradient problem, and GRU
can be considered as a variant of LSTM. In order to study
the effect of these three RNN cells, we replace the GRU cell
used in GARG with vanilla RNN (denoted as GARG w/
RNN) and LSTM (denoted as GARG w/ LSTM), respec-
tively, and keep all other settings the equal. Figures 26, 27
and 28 show that the performance of the model with GRU
cells is usually better than that of vanilla RNN and LSTM
cells.

Negative Sampling Strategy The negative sampling
techniques have impact on the modeling performance. We
investigate three negative sampling strategies, 1.e., random

 

L] Importance
[S5) Adversarial
[-] Random

Metric Value (%)

 

 

Pre@5 Pre@20 Rec@5 Rec@20 mAP@5mAP@20
Metrics

Fig.29 Impact of negative sampling strategy on Gowalla

L_] Importance
[45] Adversarial

N

N

Metric Value (%)
—

 

Pre@5 Pre@20 Rec@5 Rec@20 mAP@5 mAP@20
Metrics

Fig.30 Impact of negative sampling strategy on Foursquare
[-] Importance

[ Adversarial
L Random

 

a
N

_

Metric Value (%)
CO

 

 

Pre@5 Pre@20 Rec@5 Rec@20 mAP@5mAP@20
Metrics

Fig.31 Impact of negative sampling strategy on Brightkite

sampling, importance sampling and adversarial sampling.
Random sampling assigns equal weights to the POIs except
the positive sample to be the negative sample corresponding
to the positive one. Importance sampling uses the frequency
of the POIs being visited on the training set as the impor-
tance of the POIs. The negative samples in the adversarial
sampling[44] are generated by the generator. Figures 29,
30 and 31 show the performance of GARG with different
negative sampling methods. It can be seen that the impor-
tance sampling gets the poorest performance, because the
embeddings of some unpopular POIs cannot be sufficiently
learned. The random sampling outperforms than the adver-
sarial sampling on the Gowalla and Brightkite dataset while
the adversarial sampling perform better on the Foursquare

Q) Springer

445
446
Gowalla
Foursquare
Brightkite
Fig.32 The average attention signals on three datasets

dataset. Overall, the random sampling method is compa-
rable. We believe the reason is that the random sampling
assigns equal probability for each embedding to be trained,
and thereby it is efficient in our setting.

Attention Visualization We visualize the mean attention
signals of the three datasets on the 20 recently visited POIs,
as illustrated in Fig. 32. The higher the attention signal, the
more contribution of this POI to the sequence representation.
The result is consistent with our expectation that the latest
visited POI is the most relevant POI to future predictions.
Meanwhile, the non-zero attention on the previous POIs
indicates the necessity of attention mechanism for modeling
sequence information. Besides, there exist obvious differ-
ences among the three datasets, which supports our state-
ment in Sect. 5.2. For the Foursquare dataset, the attention
signals tend to be distributed more evenly, and the reason
might be that the POIs are distributed in a narrow area. For
the Brightkite dataset, the back-and-forth mobility pattern
might explain the larger average attention signals on the last
three POIs compared to the attention signals on Gowalla.

6 Conclusion

Mobile LBS applications have facilitated our daily life,
while the data sparsity problem and the lack of POI labels
significantly degrade the performance of the common POI
recommender systems. In this paper, we propose the GARG,
which combines the collaborative, sequential and content-
aware information to provide accurate POI recommenda-
tion for anonymous mobile LBS applications. Specifically,
GARG employs a collaborative preference module to learn
the user embeddings via reconstructing the historical implicit
feedback check-ins. Besides, GARG applies a Geographi-
cal Preference module by a GRU network to capture the
sequence information and a GCN which adapts to learning
the content-aware correlation between POIs. Evaluations over
three real-world check-in datasets with various mobility pat-
terns demonstrate the improvement of GARG compared to
the state-of-the-art POI recommender systems. GARG can be
flexibly embedded into existing mobile applications owing
to its outstanding generality and automatic learning ability.

Author Contributions This work is done by three students under the
guidance of two professors. The third author conducts experiments of

Q) Springer

S. Wu et al.

some baseline methods and the rest of the work is almost equally done
by the first two authors.

Funding The work is supported by National Natural Science Founda-
tion of China (NSFC) (No. 61832001, 61702016, 61702015), National
Key R&D Program of China (No. 2018YFB1004403), PKU-Baidu
Fund 2019BD006, Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAD),
and PKU Tencent joint research Lab.

Availability of data and materials We conduct experiments on the
three public datasets, of which the accessible links are attached in the
footnote.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

References

1. Yin H, Cui B, Zhou X, Wang W, Huang Z, Sadiq S (2016) Joint
modeling of user check-in behaviors for real-time point-of-interest
recommendation. ACM Trans Inf Syst (TOIS) 35(2):1-44

2. Cho E, Myers SA, Leskovec J (2011) Friendship and mobility:
user movement in location-based social networks. In: SIGKDD.
ACM, pp 1082-1090

3. Yin H, Cui B (2016) Spatio-temporal recommendation in social
media. Springer, Berlin

4. Yin H, Cui B, Chen L, Hu Z, Zhang C (2015) Modeling loca-
tion-based user rating profiles for personalized recommenda-
tion. ACM Trans Knowl Discov Data (TKDD) 9(3):1-41

5. Yang C, Bai L, Zhang C, Yuan Q, Han J (2017) Bridging col-
laborative filtering and semi-supervised learning: a neural
approach for poi recommendation. In: SIGKDD. ACM, pp
1245-1254

6. Wang H, Shen H, Ouyang W, Cheng X (2018) Exploiting poi-
specific geographical influence for point-of-interest recommenda-
tion. In: ICAI, pp 3877-3883

7. Xie M, Yin H, Wang H, Xu F, Chen W, Wang S (2016) Learning
graph-based poi embedding for location-based recommendation.
In: CIKM. ACM, pp 15-24

8. MaC, Zhang Y, Wang Q, Liu X (2018) Point-of-interest recom-
mendation: Exploiting self-attentive autoencoders with neighbor-
aware influence. In: CIKM. ACM, pp 697—706

9. Zhang J-D, Chow C-Y, Li Y (2014) Lore: Exploiting sequential
influence for location recommendations. In: Proceedings of the
22nd ACM SIGSPATIAL international conference on advances
in geographic information systems. ACM, pp 103-112

10. Yuan Q, Cong G, Ma Z, Sun A, Thalmann NM (2013) Time-aware
point-of-interest recommendation. In: SIGIR. ACM, pp 363-372

11. Yin H, Zhou X, Cui B, Wang H, Zheng K, Nguyen QVH (2016)
Adapting to user interest drift for poi recommendation. TKDE
28(10):2566—2581
GARG: Anonymous Recommendation of Point-of-Interest in Mobile Networks by Graph Convolution...

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

Zhao P, Zhu H, Liu Y, Li Z, Xu J, Sheng VS (2019) Where to go
next: A spatio-temporal Istm model for next poi recommendation.
In: AAAI

Guo L, Zhang D, Wang Y, Wu H, Cui B, Tan K-L (2018) Co2:
inferring personal interests from raw footprints by connecting the
offline world with the online world. ACM Trans Inf Syst (TOIS)
36(3):1-29

Liu Y, Wei W, Sun A, Miao C (2014) Exploiting geographical
neighborhood characteristics for location recommendation. In:
CIKM. ACM, pp 739-748

Zhao S, Zhao T, King I, Lyu MR (2017) Geo-teaser: Geo-temporal
sequential embedding rank for point-of-interest recommendation.
In: WWW. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering
Committee, pp 153-162

Kong D, Wu F (2018) HST-LSTM: a hierarchical spatial-tempo-
ral long-short term memory network for location prediction. In
IJCAI, pp 2341-2347

Liu B, Fu Y, Yao Z, Xiong H (2013) Learning geographical prefer-
ences for point-of-interest recommendation. In: SIGKDD. ACM,
pp 1043-1051

Mnih A, Salakhutdinov RR (2008) Probabilistic matrix factoriza-
tion. In: NIPS, pp 1257-1264

Park M-H, Hong J-H, Cho S-B (2007) Location-based recommen-
dation system using bayesian user’s preference model in mobile
devices. In: Ubicomp. Springer, Berlin, pp 1130-1139

Zhao S, King I, Lyu MR (2013) Capturing geographical influence
in poi recommendations. In: International Conference on Neural
Information Processing. Springer, pp 530-537

Ye M, Yin P, Lee W-C, Lee D-L (2011) Exploiting geographical
influence for collaborative point-of-interest recommendation. In:
SIGIR. ACM, pp 325-334

Li X, Cong G, Li X-L, Pham T-AN, Krishnaswamy S (2015)
Rank-geofm: A ranking based geographical factorization method
for point of interest recommendation. In: SIGIR. ACM, pp
433-442

Cheng C, Yang H, King I, Lyu MR (2012) Fused matrix factori-
zation with geographical and social influence in location-based
social networks. In: AAAT

Lian D, Zhao C, Xie X, Sun G, Chen E, Rui Y (2014) Geomf:
joint geographical modeling and matrix factorization for point-of-
interest recommendation. In: SIGKDD. ACM, pp 831-840

Liu W, Wang Z-J, Yao B, Yin J (2019) Geo-alm: Poi recommenda-
tion by fusing geographical information and adversarial learning
mechanism. In: Proceedings of the 28th International Joint Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence. AAAI Press, pp 1807-1813
Su Y, Li X, Zha D, Tang W, Jiang Y, Xiang J, Gao N (2019)
HREC: heterogeneous graph embedding-based personalized
point-of-interest recommendation. In: International conference
on neural information processing. Springer, pp 37-49
Christoforidis G, Kefalas P, Papadopoulos A, Manolopoulos Y
(2018) Recommendation of points-of-interest using graph embed-
dings. In: 2018 IEEE 5th international conference on data science
and advanced analytics (DSAA). IEEE, pp 31-40

Debnath M, Tripathi PK, Elmasri R (2016) Preference-aware suc-
cessive poi recommendation with spatial and temporal influence.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39,

40.

4].

42.

43.

44.

447

In: International conference on social informatics. Springer, pp
347-360

Zhang Z, Li C, Wu Z, Sun A, Ye D, Luo X (2020) Next: a neural
network framework for next poi recommendation. Front Comput
Sci 14(2):314—-333

Zhou F, Yin R, Zhang K, Trajcevski G, Zhong T, Wu J (2019)
Adversarial point-of-interest recommendation. In: The world wide
web conference, pp 3462-3468

Zhao S, Zhao T, Yang H, Lyu MR, King I (2016) Stellar: spatial-
temporal latent ranking for successive point-of-interest recom-
mendation. In: 30th AAAI conference on artificial intelligence
Liu Q, Wu S, Wang L, Tan T (2016) Predicting the next location:
a recurrent model with spatial and temporal contexts. In: 30th
AAAI conference on artificial intelligence

Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J (1997) Long short-term memory.
Neural Comput 9(8):1735—1780

Li R, Shen Y, Zhu Y (2018) Next point-of-interest recommenda-
tion with temporal and multi-level context attention. In: ICDM.
IEEE, pp 1110-1115

Liu T, Liao J, Wu Z, Wang Y, Wang J (2020) Exploiting geo-
graphical-temporal awareness attention for next point-of-interest
recommendation. Neurocomputing

Liu T, Liao J, Wu Z, Wang Y, Wang J (2019) A geographical-
temporal awareness hierarchical attention network for next point-
of-interest recommendation. In: Proceedings of the 2019 on inter-
national conference on multimedia retrieval, pp 7-15

Li L, Liu Y, Wu J, He L, Ren G (2019) Multi-modal representation
learning for successive poi recommendation. In: Asian conference
on machine learning, pp 441-456

Yang D, Zhang D, Zheng VW, Yu Z (2015) Modeling user activity
preference by leveraging user spatial temporal characteristics in
LBSNS. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern Syst 45(1):129-142
Luong M-T, Pham H, Manning CD (2015) Effective approaches to
attention-based neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv
:1508.04025

Kipf TN, Welling M (2016) Semi-supervised classification with
graph convolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1609.02907
Rendle S, Freudenthaler C, Schmidt-Thieme L (2010) Factorizing
personalized markov chains for next-basket recommendation. In:
Proceedings of the 19th international conference on World wide
web. ACM, pp 811-820

Li J, Ren P, Chen Z, Ren Z, Lian T, Ma J (2017) Neural attentive
session-based recommendation. In :Proceedings of the 2017 ACM
on conference on information and knowledge management. ACM,
pp 1419-1428

Yu B, Yin H, Zhu Z (2017) Spatio-temporal graph convolutional
networks: A deep learning framework for traffic forecasting. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1709.04875

Wang J, Yu L, Zhang W, Gong Y, Xu Y, Wang B, Zhang P, Zhang
D (2017) Irgan: A minimax game for unifying generative and
discriminative information retrieval models. In: Proceedings of
the 40th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and
development in information retrieval, pp 515-524

Q) Springer
