Al & SOCIETY (2020) 35:1075-1076
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-020-00969-1

CURMUDGEON CORNER

-)

Check for
updates

A strategic health initiative: context for Coronavirus

Richard Ennals'

Received: 20 March 2020 / Accepted: 23 March 2020 / Published online: 4 April 2020

© Springer-Verlag London Ltd., part of Springer Nature 2020

The current Coronavirus pandemic is a disruptive event, a
global “Kodak Moment” (Johnsen et al 2018). Life will not
be the same again. This does not mean that there had been
no previous warnings. We now need to think about ways
forward after the pandemic. Back in September 1985, at a
conference in Brighton hosted by the A/&Society Editor,
Karamjit Gill, on “Artificial Intelligence for Society”, we
discussed ways forward in our field. I was working at Impe-
rial College and in the UK Alvey Directorate, designing
and managing research and development in Advanced IT.
I outlined a suggested “Strategic Health Initiative”, which
was published in AJ For Society (Ennals 1986b), and in Star
Wars: A Question of Initiative (Ennals 1986a). Over the last
34 years, there have of course been many major technologi-
cal advances. However, I suggest that the principles set out
in the paper remain valid for the new context in March 2020.

The Strategic Health Initiative in 1986 argued for drawing
on progress in medical science, advanced computing and
social administration. It was then held that success would
have enormous potential benefits, not only for the health
of the nation, but also for the economy. Improved health
and medical services would provide considerable financial
benefits, as would the development of a better trained work-
force. It would have direct effects on the whole population,
bringing them into contact with computer technology in a
benevolent context, reducing the division into two nations of
“haves” and “have nots” with respect to health and computer
literacy. The health of individuals is seen as integral to the
health of the nation. Illness is not a crime to be punished by
financial penalties, and information concerning the restora-
tion of health should be freely available in accessible terms.

Reflecting back on the 1986 intiative, one significant area
for the application of advanced technology was identified
as the Health Service. At the time of its establishment in
1948, the National Health Service (NHS) was a model for

><} Richard Ennals
richard.ennals @ gmail.com

' Kingston University, Kingston Hill, Kingston KT2 7LB, UK

international health care provision, and a central part of the
policy of a government which was concerned to strengthen
its people after suffering and war, seeing such provision as
an essential investment. The NHS has since suffered from
government neglect, with funding failing to match needs,
and hospitals not being equipped with the same level of tech-
nology that should be standard in other advanced countries.
It has become regarded all too often as an optional expense,
increasingly to be devolved to the individual or the “commu-
nity”, where the financial resources required for work with
advanced technology are not available. Even now in 2020,
this health care deficit sounds familiar.

I argued then that prevention may be better than cure, but
that the system of financial incentives is biased towards cure.
In these dire times of the Coronavirus, I wonder what has
changed. In 1986, I noted that where known enemy diseases
threaten, our detection equipment is out of order. Straight-
forward tests were available for many forms of cancer, yet
general scanning was not carried out on grounds of cost, and
where intelligence of invasive disease had been acquired, all
too often it was not transmitted to the individuals concerned.
The computer systems capable of managing the information
existed, but the funds were not provided to pay for them.
We had the necessary technology for much of this work, but
we lacked the political will to apply it. To quote Ian Lloyd
MP, “We have found the enemy, and he is us’. Our front
line medical troops were pitifully resourced, and were made
to work inordinate hours in the medical trenches with sub-
standard weapons. Patients had to be turned away from high-
technology treatment in the cause of economy. Intensive care
facilities were kept in mothballs. With changes in cleaning
and catering arrangements, hospitals might not be healthy
places to be if you were ill. Patients would rather not be ill,
and, if ill, would rather not trouble the doctor. Civil defence
advice is needed for patients in their homes, and in diagnos-
ing the source of attacks of headache or nausea, preventive
measures to enable them to take evasive action, getting out
of the line of fire of heart disease, cancer or cirrhosis of the
liver. “Protect and survive” should be the watchword for
the citizen in the blasted wasteland of community medicine.

Q) Springer
1076

Often we have the resources available to repel an attack from
outside, but they are not sufficiently organised. Doctors need
decision support as they seek to define a strategy with a
particular patient and crisis management tools as numerous
complaints emerge, or as competing demands are made for
scarce resources. Increasingly they need a mastery of the
official rules and regulations (on, e.g. the prescription of
certain drugs and their generic substitutes) and an encyclo-
paedic knowledge of drugs and their interactions. They need
to be able to explain their diagnoses and treatment in appro-
priate language, based on a model of the level of knowledge
of patients and their families, and to draw on the experience
of others. In the community medicine field, whether of bare-
foot doctors or a team of mobile professionals, information
needs to be assembled, available and explicable. Advanced
medical teamwork requires advanced information technol-
ogy if the varied knowledge of the interdisciplinary team is
to be brought to bear on shared problems.

Even in those early days of 1986, it was clear to me that
with the advent of artificial intelligence techniques, further
advances are made possible. Artificial intelligence is con-
cerned with the study of human thinking, and its model-
ling in computer programs. We can learn about particular
problems by attempting to model them, and the consequent
programs can be of use in helping people to solve such prob-
lems themselves. Early work has been done in psychiatry
and psychotherapy, and in problems of vision and speech,
which shows the potential for further work. Military fund-
ing has gone into systems for voice and speech recognition,
and for message understanding. An application focus in the
field of intensive medical care or care of the multiply handi-
capped could be extremely beneficial, using, for example,
speech-driven workstations as were developed on an Alvey
large demonstrator project.

The Strategic Health Initiative of 1986 argued that if such
a programme was successful, the strategic results for the
country could be spectacular. We could expect an improve-
ment in the health of the population, with a cost-effective
change of emphasis to prevention rather than cure, and a fall
in the number of working days lost each year through illness.
The research community could benefit from the motivation
of work in “advanced technology with a human face’’. Intel-
ligent computer technology places a new burden on us to
determine the kind of society in which we choose to live. It
assumes the form laid down by its masters.

As in 1986, I still believe that researchers prefer to
work on projects they believe in. Their brains cannot sim-
ply be hired for whatever purpose. Although in the age of

Q) Springer

Al & SOCIETY (2020) 35:1075-1076

machine learning and deep learning, AI scientists may be
able to command astronomical salaries for being trans-
ferred between research centres like football stars, we still
find skilled researchers who are dedicated to the develop-
ment of socially responsive AI systems and tools for health
and welfare of people. Their choice of where to work need
not be determined by money: after years of neglect they
are suddenly in a new position of power where they can
refuse work which they find ethically unacceptable. They
can choose instead to focus on fundamental research effort
on attempting to solve human problems. In this spirit, we
again suggest an initiative to tap this supply of idealism. We
need a strategic focus for the next stage of development of
an infant generation of technology, to the benefit of society
in general: a Strategic Health Initiative.

If we abdicate from participation in the decisions as to
how the technology is to be used, we must accept respon-
sibility for what follows. I close with the words of Lord
Beveridge, whose work laid the foundations of the British
Welfare State, including the National Health Service.

“The object of the government in peace and in war 1s not
the glory of rulers or of races, but the happiness of the com-
mon man.” Beveridge Report 1942

Curmudgeon Corner Curmudgeon Corner is a short opinionated col-
umn on trends in technology, arts, science and society, commenting on
issues of concern to the research community and wider society. Whilst
the drive for super-human intelligence promotes potential benefits to
wider society, it also raises deep concerns of existential risk, thereby
highlighting the need for an ongoing conversation between technology
and society. At the core of Curmudgeon concern is the question: What
is it to be human in the age of the AI machine? -Editor.

References

Beveridge W (1942) Beveridge report: social insurance and allied ser-
vices. HMSO, London

Ennals R (1986a) A way forward for advanced information technol-
ogy: SHI—a strategic health initiative. In: Star wars: a question
of initiative. Wiley, Chichester, pp 122-135

Ennals R (1986b) A way forward for advanced information technol-
ogy: SHI—a strategic health initiative. In: Gill KS (ed) Artificial
intelligence for society. Wiley, Chichester, pp 19-30

Johnsen H et al (eds) (2018) Coping with the future: rethinking
assumptions for society, business and work. Routledge, London

Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
