Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107194

 

“* RELIABILITY
ENGINEERING

& SYSTEM
SAFETY

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

   
   
   

«
@asy
a» <Y

§

Reliability Engineering and System Safety

 

EVIER

Wee

LS

phe

    

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ress

 

Modernizing risk assessment: A systematic integration of PRA and PHM

Check for

techniques updates

 

Ramin Moradi’, Katrina M. Groth

Systems Risk and Reliability Analysis Lab (SyRRA), Center for Risk and Reliability, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742, USA

 

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

 

 

Recent advances in sensing and computing technologies have resulted in an abundance of data in various for-
mats and more processing power for using this data. Consequently, there has been an interest in using these
advances to enhance modeling and assessment techniques for safety and reliability of a variety of systems. To
date, this has occurred under two distinct aspects of reliability engineering. Prognostics and Health Management
(PHM) has developed powerful new algorithms for understanding and predicting the mechanical and electrical
devices’ health. For complex systems, the techniques of Probabilistic Risk Assessment (PRA), which provide a
system-level perspective, have become increasingly dynamic. Both PHM and PRA bring unique advantages and
limitations. PHM excels at data handling and supports prediction, but the methods applicable at the component
level are not suitable for modeling complex engineering systems (CES). PRA provides a comprehensive approach
suitable for drawing together many types of data and assessing complex systems, but is limited in the ability to
exploit advanced ML methods or enable prediction. In this paper, we explore how to systematically draw to-
gether the advances in PHM and PRA to provide a more forward-looking, model- and data-driven approach for

Keywords:

Complex systems

Prognostics and health management (PHM)
Probabilistic risk assessment

Logic modeling

Deep learning

assessing and predicting the risk and health of CES.

 

1. Introduction

Complex Engineering Systems (CES) such as power plants, chemical
processing facilities, and energy infrastructure (Fig. 1) affect almost
every aspect of society. These systems are dynamic, involve compli-
cated physics, consist of many interconnected and interdependent
machine and human elements, and operate at multiple levels and
multiple scales. CES failures can cause catastrophic consequences such
as loss of human lives, financial losses, or technology abandonment and
a change in the direction of an industry.

As modern industry moves towards the vision of a data-driven
“Industry 4.0,” there are new challenges and new opportunities for
reliability engineers [1]. Advanced digitalization, large number of low-
cost sensors, and new high speed processors offer new promises for
data-driven insights. These advances provide an opportunity to better
understand the complex system’s behavior based on a vast array of data
which offers detailed insight into safety and reliability, improved lo-
gistics, reduced costs, and more efficient use of resources. On the other
hand, harnessing this large, diverse data presents significant challenges,
including computational challenges (e.g., data storage, processing), and
larger challenges about how to use it to support decision making about
engineering systems.

* Corresponding author.

Two aspects of reliability engineering seek to harness this data to
provide insight into system safety and reliability: Probabilistic Risk/
Safety Assessment (PRA/PSA), and Prognostics and _ Health
Management (PHM). Together with the surge in the volume of available
data, PHM has been mainly focused on developing new powerful al-
gorithms for handling high-volumes of multi-dimensional condition
monitoring data of various mechanical and electrical components. On
the other hand, PRA’s main focus has been providing a system-level
perspective with emphasis on engineering knowledge and systems logic
modeling. PHM and PRA appear to have complementary characteristics
in the context of CES risk and reliability analysis.

Surprisingly, these efforts are occurring in a relatively siloed
manner. As we will show in Section 2, searching for the intersection of
PHM- and PRA- related terms in the leading reliability engineering
journals produces only a handful of results. Both approaches have
distinct advantages and disadvantages. In this paper, we seek to sys-
tematically deconstruct and re-assemble these two approaches and
develop a new framework which overcomes the limitations of both
methods. The new framework will provide a systematic, dynamic ap-
proach to risk assessment, prediction, and health monitoring for com-
plex systems.

The paper is organized as follows, in Section 2 we describe our

E-mail addresses: raminmrd@umd.edu (R. Moradi), kgroth@umd.edu (K.M. Groth).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2020.107194

Received 18 September 2019; Received in revised form 7 August 2020; Accepted 14 August 2020

Available online 15 August 2020

0951-8320/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license

(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
R. Moradi and K.M. Groth

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107194

Table 1
The selected search keywords for finding the most relevant available literature (2015-2020) .
No. Selected search keywords RESS Safety Science JRR
1 Risk AND (prognosis OR prognostics) 8 2 8
2 Risk AND (Real-time OR Dynamic OR Online) AND System 56 44 1
3 (System-level) AND (Reliability Or Risk) AND Complex System 43 25 0
4 (“Machine Learning” OR “Deep learning”) AND (“logic model” OR “event tree” OR “fault tree” OR “Bayesian network”) 43 27 8
5 PHM AND (PRA OR PSA) 2 0 0

literature review methodology, the key ideas, and the identified studies.
Then in Section 3, we describe the two main elements of the frame-
work, PRA and PHM. In Section 4, our proposed framework is described
in detail and finally in Section 5 we present our concluding thoughts.

2. Background literature

To provide a solid basis for this study, we searched for the keywords
in Table 1 in the titles, abstracts, and keywords of papers in relevant
journals (i.e., Reliability Engineering and Systems Safety, Journal of Risk
and Reliability, and Safety Science) with emphasis on recent literature
(2015-2020). This search resulted in identification of 267 unique pa-
pers. To ensure comprehensiveness beyond these three journals, we also
looked at the reference list of the most relevant papers in addition to
searching for their titles in Google Scholar to look at similar existing
studies. From the resulting set, we kept papers that dealt with complex
systems and had one or more of the following elements: a system-level
perspective, systems logic modeling, use of different information
sources, and dynamic/online/real-time assessment. Finally, twenty
papers were determined to be the most relevant studies to the idea of
integration of PRA and PHM.

According to the objective of the papers, they can be categorized in
two groups: PHM-oriented studies (diagnostics and prognostics) and
PRA-oriented studies (risk, safety, and accidents).

2.1. PRA-oriented studies

Enhancing risk analysis practices has become the purpose of several
recent publications in the risk assessment community. Hu et al. [2] is
among the first comprehensive framework studies. In this study, com-
ponent health states are assessed using limit-checking; these health
states are mapped to their corresponding state spaces and used as inputs
to a Dynamic Bayesian Network (DBN). The DBN provides a system-
level state estimation and enables prognostics. However, the definition
of consequences and risk in this study is limited to system function.
Also, the subsystem models are simplistic as they have used limit
checking for state estimation. In complex systems, doing so would re-
sult in a high false alarm rate and missing the value in analyzing the
trend of measurements.

Favaro and Saleh [3] used the system model and control theory to
prioritize risk and hazards based on their associated accidents closeness
in time. They provided a measure of proximity of the system states to

adverse events. Their approach is complementary to PRA and provides
an accident contingency map to help with the operators situational
awareness. However, accurate system model and degradation models
for accident precursors are required for this approach and such models
may not be available for all system types.

Zeng and Zio [4] introduced the idea of using health estimation
models (Particle Filter (PF) in this case) to update the reliability of a
lithium ion battery that is a safety barrier in an Event Tree (ET) using
operational data. This study was followed by similar studies which are
within the scope of Dynamic Risk Assessment (DRA) or dynamic PRA.
Kim et al. [5] used prognostics models to update the failure rate of the
components that can initiate a Loss of Coolant Accident (LOCA) in a
nuclear power plant. Another example of a health estimation model is
the Xing et al. [6] study in which a Hidden Markov Gaussian Mixture
Model (HM-GMM) is trained as a degradation state estimator, and then
a Bayesian Network (BN) is used to fuse inspection data with HM-GMM
model output. The outcome of this fusion provides updated frequencies
for the initiating events or probabilities the safety barrier functions in
an event tree. These studies have provided key elements of a more
dynamic PRA approach, but they are not comprehensive frameworks
and have limitations in how they address multiple operations, failure
modes, and accident scenarios. Also the need to incorporate various
types of data, use of operational data, and applicability for changing
failure rates should be addressed in these studies.

Kabir et al. [7] proposed extending Hierarchically Performed Ha-
zard Origin and Propagation Studies (HiP-HOPS) with Petri Nets and
BN. HiP-HOPS is a model-based dependability analysis approach which
generates a system level failure model by composing the failure models
of individual components. They provide a methodology on how to
generate a Petri Net or BN based on the HiP-HOPS outcome. Using the
same tools, Taleb-Berrouane et al. [8] proposed the combination of BN
and Stochastic Petri Nets (SPN). BN is a powerful system modeling tool
and SPN can capture the dynamic behavior of complex systems. By
combining the two, they provide the ability to continuously updating
the systems failure probability. This approach is implemented on a
pump, a relatively small system. In both of these studies, there is no
clear separation between subsystems and the whole system, the ap-
plicability to large-scale and/or complex systems in terms of the
amount of required detailed knowledge about the components, com-
putational expense, and possible approaches to incorporate prognostics
are not discussed.

With a different perspective, Groth et al. [9] explored building

bare) 01) it ae

 

Fig. 1. From left to right, thermal power plant, a refinery, control room of a process plant. All considered complex engineering systems.
R. Moradi and K.M. Groth

dynamic diagnosis capabilities using a combination of engineering
knowledge, historical data, and multi-physics simulations; this was
done for loss of flow and transient overpower accident in a generic
sodium fast reactor. The results of the simulations and traditional PRA
data were used to construct a DBN for the reactor monitoring and di-
agnosis in that accident scenario. This work also illustrated scalability
issues with using the techniques on more complex systems and multiple
failure modes.

Application of deep learning in risk assessment of CES is a nuance in
this field and very few studies have discussed it. Paltrinieri et al. [10]
suggests providing all historic data about the system’s normal opera-
tion, accidents, and expert opinion as features and the instantaneous
plant states as labels to a Deep Neural Network (DNN) which calculates
a holistic risk index as the output. They demonstrate a new perspective,
however there are many challenges such as accessible data (collecting
enough data and proper labeling) on the whole system, interpretability
of results, and limitations in diagnosis and fault isolation.

In addition to the discussed limitations, a key limitation of all
aforementioned studies is that none of them address risk prognostics
properly; their objective is mainly to enable risk assessment at the
current time.

2.2. PHM-oriented studies

Within PHM research, few studies address the systems-level per-
spective and/or the incorporation of logic model. For example, to ad-
dress the problem of a system-level Remaining Useful Life (RUL) esti-
mation (prognostics), Rodrigues et al. [11] assumed normally
distributed RULs for the 9 components of an electrical system and uses
system failure architecture (modeled in a Fault Tree (FT)) to fuse all the
RULs and provide a System-RUL (S-RUL) for maintenance optimization
purposes. Liu and Zio [12] proposed a framework based on parallel
Monte Carlo simulation to estimate the degradation state and RUL of a
system composed of multiple components with dependent degradation
processes. Khorasgani et al. [13] used stochastic simulation and inverse
first order reliability method to compute the S-RUL and concluded that
none of these methods are scalable to a large number of components. In
the last three studies, the system-level RUL is estimated without using
all available sources of information and regardless of consequences and
possible interventions.

Diagnostic approaches for CES are more concerned about the sub-
system relations and should be able to provide an explanation for the
root causes of any given fault or failure. BNs possess a unique capability
in modeling casual relations, dependencies, uncertainty, and more. This
is why BN and its extensions are one of the most used models for this
purpose. For example, Abu-Samah et al. [14] used manufacturing
system operation data in addition to other available contextual in-
formation to train a BN representing the relationships among the
system variables and produce a system-level measure for failure de-
tection (warning time is considered as an extraction criteria). This BN is
then used to extract time bound system-level failure signatures. Amin
et al. [15] used a DBN for modeling the system failure logic and dy-
namically update the probability of system failure according to the
observed symptoms. However, the online operation data is not taken
into account.

Rebello et al. [16] have decomposed a system into its main sub-
systems, trained a hidden Markov model for degradation assessment of
each subsystem, and combined all these health estimations via DBN to
achieve a system-level health estimation. Yet they consider neither the
structure of the system nor the interdependencies among subsystems. In
a similar fashion, Iamsumang et al. | 17] selected DBN to perform online
system health monitoring and anomaly detection. It proposed pre-
computations and dynamic programming as a way to address the
computational efficiency and scalability issues that are associated with
extensive use of BN. Yet they do not provide a guideline for modeling
complex subsystems degradation behaviors and assume degradation

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107194

models as given.

In addition to DBN, Object Oriented Bayesian Networks (OOBN) are
also used in a number of studies. In OOBNSs classes are used to provide a
reusable probabilistic model which can be applied to multiple similar
objects. For instance, Cai et al. [18] have used OOBNs for real-time fault
diagnosis of complex systems that have many identical subsystems.
They have used expert knowledge and historic data to construct the
OOBNs and then used operation data for continuously monitoring the
system health. Zhang et al. [19] built system function models based on
system structure and engineering knowledge, which are then used
along with the causal relations among the subsystems to develop a
“system behavior model” using Dynamic Object Oriented Bayesian
Network (DOOBN). This model is then used for system diagnostic and
RUL prediction. Although these models can be a great option for
complex systems with repetitive subsystems, they suffer from relatively
simplistic assumptions when it comes to fault symptoms (mainly limit
checking). Overall, it appears that due to computational expense BN
and its extensions cannot be used alone to model a CES.

In an approach similar to BNs, Blancke et al. [20] modeled the
failure logic of a hydroelectric generator stator using a generic graph
theory model. This graph represents root causes, active and inactive
physical states and the failure modes of the system. They use operation
data and inspection to map the system physical state to the graph and
detect the failure mode that system is in. However, operation load,
maintenance action, and dependencies among failure mechanisms are
not considered. The authors note that a system-level prognostic ap-
proach using all the available information sources is yet to be devel-
oped.

Another interesting system diagnostics approach is demonstrated in
Ren et al. [21]. It decomposed a complex cryogenic propellant loading
system according to its different failure modes, used the available op-
eration data for each of these states to train a separate deep learning
model, and finally used all the trained model in parallel to process
operation data and assess health of the system with the ability to detect
different failure modes. Yet the challenge with this approach is whether
the training data for deep learning models would be sufficient for all
different failure modes of a complex system.

In addition to the discussed limitations, a key limitation of all of the
studies discussed in this section is that they never consider what would
happen after a certain failure in the system while a failure can indeed
have various implications and consequences.

It appears that the reviewed PRA- and PHM- oriented studies have
partially tried to draw concepts from one another. This is why some of
the PRA-oriented papers involve diagnostics and some of the PHM-or-
iented studies involve systems logic modeling and offline analysis.
These involvements bear witness to the need for a formal and sys-
tematic integration of PRA and PHM.

3. Methodology

To develop the new framework, we first identify and define the
main elements of both PRA and PHM and consider their advantages and
disadvantages. While the main elements of each approach are likely to
be well known to the experts within each constituent community,
Table 1 shows there is a significant lack of overlap between the two
fields. This necessitates establishing a consistent set of baseline steps
and terminologies. After establishing the basic elements, we interweave
the steps of each to create the new framework.

3.1. Probabilistic risk assessment (PRA)

PRA provides a well-established family of techniques that addresses
safety, risk, and reliability of these complex engineering systems. PRA is
increasingly embedded in the regulation of nuclear power plants, oil
and gas facilities, chemical processes, and infrastructure. Because of the
ability to handle uncertainty and complicated trade-offs in complex
R. Moradi and K.M. Groth

socio-technical problems, risk-informed approaches are being rapidly
introduced within public policy across U.S. federal agencies involved in
science, engineering, public health and safety. The use of PRA as a
decision support methodology in the nuclear power domain can be
traced back to the 1975 WASH-1400 Reactor Safety Study [22]. PRA
uses a combination of system and reliability engineering methods,
logic-based models, and probabilistic and deterministic methods to deal
with complexity and uncertainty. It provides a structured, quantitative
method to systematically identify component and system failure
sources and scenarios, estimate the probability of events related to
failure and mitigation, and determine consequences of undesired
events. The results of these steps are then used as a rational, coherent,
scientific basis for decision making on risk management measures.

Traditional PRA is very effective at modeling complex hardware
systems, and approaches have been designed to incorporate the risks
introduced by human reliability, software failures, and organizational
factors that define complex engineering systems. Recent advances in
computing have enabled simulation-based dynamic PRA approaches to
explore thousands of accident scenarios via multiple approaches
[23-25]. However, despite these advances, there remain gaps in PRA.
To date, PRA has largely been used as an offline, static technology and
mostly focused on retrospective analysis. Relatively very few studies
have attempted to incorporate real-time condition monitoring data
within the implementation of dynamic PRA. There remains a need for
better analysis of complex event progression, the ability to use all
available sources of information, and new types of data [4,8,26—28].

We developed Fig. 2 to draw together the major elements of PRA,
unifying concepts from seminal textbooks in the field [29,30]. PRA
starts with clearly defining the objective and scope of doing the study,
and contains six major steps.

1. Information Assembly: as a first step, information is collected and
organized to provide a thorough understanding of the system, its
components, and the expected functions and behavior. The typical
information includes a variety of qualitative and quantitative in-
formation in multiple formats, including detailed system descrip-
tions, layouts, functional descriptions, and available failure and
operational data.

2. Initiating Events Identification: serves to identify the potential ha-
zards and threats to the system, that could lead to an undesired
event or initiate a sequence of events with an undesired outcome.
This includes consideration of the root causes of those events. This
step draws on experience, data, and consideration of possible hy-
pothetical situations.

3. Scenario Development: for each initiating event the causal chain
leading from initiating event to possible outcomes (consequences) is
created. The scenario elements included in this causal sequence are
potential success and failure events, hardware, software, controller
or human interventions, barriers, and mitigations.

4. Logic Modeling: a set of logic-based models is then constructed for
the scenarios. Modeling methods such as Fault Trees (FT), Event

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107194

Trees (ET), and BNs are used to document known relationships be-
tween the scenario elements. These models are quantified with
probabilities from the assembled information from component and
event databases and operating experience.

5. Consequence Analysis: in this step, the hypothesized consequences
(e.g., rupture of a pressure vessel) for each causal scenario are
modeled and the potential losses they impose are quantified, typi-
cally with a combination of deterministic physical models and
probabilistic loss models. An uncertainty analysis is performed on
the expected consequences.

6. Results Assessment: the total risk is calculated by integrating the
aforementioned elements. Sensitivity and uncertainty analysis are
performed to evaluate the impact of various modeling assumptions
on the risk. Depending on the objectives of the study, the results are
explored further. Generally, the risk results are compared against a
risk tolerability or acceptance thresholds for the system, and the
most important scenarios and contributing components are identi-
fied, ranked, and major uncertainties are illuminated.

After completing these six steps, there is feedback into the risk
management measures for the system, which may change the system,
data sources, or other aspects of the analysis. This feedback process
continues until the objectives of the analysis are met.

3.2. Prognostics and health management (PHM)

PHM as a concept has been inspired by medical science practices
[31] and has been studied by many researchers from many different
engineering fields over the last two decades. PHM is well-established
for mechanical components such as gears and bearings, pumps, valves,
and for electronic components or devices such as LEDs, batteries, and
circuits [32-34]. PHM techniques have been extended to some systems
such as engines, fuel cells and wind turbines.

PHM focuses on developing models and algorithms for diagnostics
and prognostics (i.e., reliability assessment at the current moment and
in the future). PHM systems use real-time and historical operational
data to provide decision support for improved performance, reliability,
and maintainability. The most recent proposed PHM models are cap-
able of handling high volumes of multi-dimensional data collected by
sensors, which nowadays are largely found at the component-level.
Recently PHM methodologies have been proposed for more complex
systems [21,35], but there remain gaps. There is an established need for
further development of PHM methodologies that can capture the in-
teractions in a system for an accurate system-level diagnostics and
prognostics [31,36-38]. Furthermore, PHM remains strictly hardware
focused, and neglects important elements of complex engineering sys-
tems, including human and organizational factors.

We developed Fig. 3 to draw together major concepts from PHM
frameworks [36,37,39,40]. In general, PHM studies have a uniform
objective: to assess health state of a component and/or system (the first
box in Fig. 3). PHM typically incorporates four major sequential steps

Risk Management Measures

Information
Assembly

Initiating Events
Identification

» - System description » - Hazards and threats
- Failure and accident identification
data - Root cause analysis
- Info. organization

determination

ov
oy
oO
oO
WM
B
©
2
oO
QD
ZS
oO

barriers

Scenario
Development

» - Causal sequence

- Interventions and

 

Results
Assessment

Logic
Modeling

Consequence
Analysis

- Total risk

- Importance ranking
- Sensitivity analysis
- Uncertainty analysis

» - Model construction » - Consequence
- Model quantification modeling
- Model validation - Quantification
- Uncertainty analysis

Fig. 2. A general PRA framework. After defining the objective and scope of the PRA study, there are six major steps that provide risk assessment, which feedback into
the risk management of the system. This feedback process continues until the objectives of the analysis are met.
R. Moradi and K.M. Groth

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107194

Health Management Measures

Data Condition

Collection

Data
Manipulation

ap | Pee trocesin

- Performance
criteria
determination

- Fault detection

- Feature extraction

Data Acquisition

Monitoring

- Anomaly detection

 

Decision
Support
- Cost & life
optimization
- Preventive actions
comparison

Health
Assessment

Prognostics

- RUL estimation
- Failure
progression
modeling

- Fault isolation
- Failure mode
identification

Progsnostics

Fig. 3. A holistic PHM Framework. It has four major steps that are indicated with dashed lined: data acquisition, diagnostics, prognostics, and health management).
Diagnostics includes sub-steps of condition monitoring and health assessment, and data acquisition incorporates both data collection and manipulation.

which are data acquisition, diagnostics, prognostics, and health man-
agement.

1. Data Acquisition: begins with a data collection step, which involves
continuously collecting representative information from the system.
This typically occurs through a properly designed and maintained
network of sensors. Then, the data needs to be manipulated and
prepared for use in diagnostics and prognostics. Data pre-processing
(i.e., cleaning, normalization, integration) and feature extraction are
the necessary tasks of data manipulation. The features in PHM are
typically a set of Health Indexes (HIs).

2. Diagnostics: includes continuously monitoring the operating condi-
tion of the component or system to detect faults or anomalies based
on deviation from the expected normal values of performance cri-
teria. Then, if a fault or anomaly was detected, the health of the
system is assessed by identifying the root cause, conducting failure
mode and failure mechanism identification, and isolating the faulty
or anomalous component(s). In other words, diagnostics is more of a
classification problem that prescribes if the health in a particular
component or subsystem or the system is degraded.

3. Prognostics: this is the predictive aspect of PHM, a step that predicts
the time at which a system or a component will no longer perform as
intended and needed. In order to implement prognostics, the most
important task is to develop a model for the degradation process of
the component or system under study. These models can be physics-
based, data-based, or hybrid which is a combination of the two. This
model is used to project when the system will meet a specified cri-
teria, such as the time at which it will reach a defined efficiency
threshold, failure probability, degradation level, or a minimum
tolerable time to failure. The predicted time is called the RUL in the
PHM literature. In addition to RUL estimation, computing the
probability of failure, estimating relative likelihood of different
failure modes in future, and failure progression modeling can be
studied in prognostics.

4. Health Management: includes preparing required information to
support decision-making. Often in PHM this is intended to provide
actionable information on how to optimally extend the RUL of the
system while still controlling costs (i.e., to manage the health). This
can provide insight for the selection of damage control actions and
maintenance policy to extend the RUL of the system in a way that
minimizes maintenance and operational costs while maximizing
system availability and capability. Maintenance policies can be ei-
ther corrective or preventive. Corrective means that the action will
be performed after observing a fault or anomaly. In contrast, pre-
ventive maintenance is the preferred method (especially for safety-
critical systems) since it would intervene early in the degradation
process before a failure happens. Preventive maintenance policies
can be designed based on reliability, age, and risk of failure in a

system. Decision support provides all the mentioned information
required for a proper selection of health management measures.

After completing these four steps, there is feedback into the health
management measures for the system, which may change the system,
data collection, and consequently other aspects of the analysis.

4. Proposed framework

In this section, we pull together the steps of PRA and PHM to con-
struct a comprehensive framework. We present our framework in two
parts. The first part is the construction of the framework, and the
second part is the application of the constructed framework. These are
shown together in Fig. 4.

4.1. Framework construction

4.1.1. Objective selection

Similar to PRA, the first step it to determine the general objective of
the study. There are a number of possible objectives. Such a framework
can be used for determining a specific accident prevention measure,
enabling risk monitoring during known scenarios, and offline decision
making support among others. In addition, owing to inclusion of PHM,
the objectives can go beyond PRA or even dynamic PRA; prediction of
risk or risk prognostics can be an objective in this framework. Similar to
PHM, objectives can also include supporting maintenance decisions and
life cycle management.

Considering the objectives of both PRA and PHM, the proposed
methodology would be able to answer the following questions:

1. What is the current risk or health state of the system and its com-
ponents?

2. What are the probable future states of the system and components?

3. How would a fault or failure in one component or aspect of the
system impact the functionality of other components and the
system?

4. When will the system reach a defined risk or health threshold (e.g.,
end of life)?

4.1.2. Information assembly

The objective of this step is obtaining a thorough understanding of
the system, the components, and the relevant data sources similar to the
first step of PRA. This step is distinct from current PHM practices which
often rely on a large volume of relatively complete of data to generate
insights. In the context of a CES, obtaining complete, comprehensive,
big data would be costly and inefficient, even if techniques existed for
collecting and handling that data. Creating a framework that leverages
engineering knowledge and multiple sources of partial data, akin to
R. Moradi and K.M. Groth

pewwm mw ew ewww ew ewww www wn wwe w nw eww ww ww we ewww ww eee wwe ew ww ew ww ww eww ewe ew oe eee

   
    
      

Models Models

System-level Analysis

Scenario
Development

System Logic Model

.
foe

Development

Consequence
Analysis

System performance
criteria determination

System’s Dynamic Risk
Assessment Framework

 

 

 

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107194

[ccetietieeetietiieetiestieentieestieetieetietelietietieetieetieettieetiettietietee tell cele]

2) Framework Application

Complex Engineered System

Data Collection

Data Manipulation

Hs

Subsystem-level Assessment

Diagnostics Prognostics

System Logic Model

.

System-level Assessment

Condition Monitoring

Health/Risk Assessment

Health/Risk Prognostics

.

r.
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

Decision Support

:

Fig. 4. The proposed risk assessment framework which draws various elements of PHM and PRA. On the left, the steps to construct the framework and on the right,
the steps to apply the framework on a complex system are demonstrated. The gray box in framework application conveys that both subsystem-level assessment and

system logic model are being used in system-level assessment.

 

Fig. 5. Schematic demonstration of how CES operate at various levels. The solid
circles represent components, a cluster of them makes a subsystem, a cluster of
subsystems makes a larger subsystem, and finally the whole system is the
combination of all of them.

PRA, provides a more tractable approach.

In this step, the desired understanding includes the interdependence
among the system, its components and subsystems, the surrounding
environment, the relevant data sources, and situational, human, and
organization factors. This step requires acquiring information such as
system description, functions, data from experiments, material char-
acteristics, performance tests, results from science- and engineering-
based simulations at the component and system levels, historic opera-
tion data, failure data, inspection, and maintenance reports, and formal
expert opinion. These data and information have a variety of mod-
alities, from text-based, to numeric data, to images and tables. This step
provides a comprehensive set of information which will be used in
constructing a system-specific version of the framework.

4.1.3. Subsystem-level analysis

Before describing this step, it is necessary to first discuss some at-
tributes of complex systems which necessitate dividing the analysis into
two levels, which we call subsystem-level analysis and system-level
analysis. We use the term sub-system to denote the level of decom-
position where “typical” PHM data is collected for the system of in-
terest. The subsystem-level analysis is reflective of the model develop-
ment aspects of current PHM, and the system-level analysis is reflective
of the model development aspects of PRA.
R. Moradi and K.M. Groth

First, complex systems can be modeled as a multi-level hierarchical
structure with interactive components [17,41,42]. We can visualize this
as in Fig. 5, where a cluster of interactive components would form a
sub-system, a group of sub-systems forms a larger sub-system which
comprise the CES. Second, given the current data collection and mon-
itoring techniques, different types and amounts of data are collected at
different levels of system abstraction, and this data collection is hap-
pening at different frequencies with different resolutions and qualities.
In addition, according to the criticality of the subsystem there may be a
need to perform analyses at different levels of fidelity or frequency. a
higher quality and more frequent assessment. Thus different analysis
techniques are required. Together these characteristics motivate de-
composing the CES into subsystems and motivate use of an ensemble of
models.

The objective of subsystem-level analysis is to develop (and/or
train) the necessary models for each designated subsystem health di-
agnostics and prognostics. Diagnosis is the step which includes de-
tecting anomalies and faults and identifying the root causes for the
relevant subsystem. The subsystem prognostics step includes estimating
or predicting the failure progress and its impact on RUL of a subsystem.

As is done in current PHM, these models can be classified as physics-
based, data-driven, or hybrid models. In physics-based models, the
degradation process is described by mathematical formulation derived
from the underlying physics of the subsystem degradation. The physical
model parameters are determined from experimental data and may be
adjusted based on physical characteristics of the subsystem (e.g., ma-
terial, dimensions, or manufacturing conditions of the subsystem).
These parameters determine the behavior of the models and impact the
error of the model. The models are employed to diagnose the de-
gradation level of a subsystem and extrapolate the degradation level
until it reaches a failure threshold (prognostics).

Data-based models diagnose and prognose directly from monitored
data. To achieve this, various classification, regression, and machine
learning models are used on proper training data. These models include
[43]: 1) Artificial intelligence and machine learning approaches like
deep learning [44] and fuzzy logic [45], and 2) Statistical approaches
like Gaussian process regression [46], Gamma process [47], Wiener
process [48], and Hidden Markov Models [49].

Among data-based models, there are several reasons to choose deep
learning models including their ability to handle multi-dimensional
data, learn in an unsupervised manner which is a great benefit in cases
where the data is not labeled properly [50,51], and emergence of novel
concepts in deep learning such as transfer learning [52] which allows
exploring effectiveness of training models on one component and apply
them on other similar components with minor adjustments.

Finally, hybrid models integrate merits of different approaches to
reduce limitations and achieve more accurate results (for further details
please refer to Baraldi et al. [53], Lei et al. [54]).

This step also involves feature engineering and constructing a set of
Health Indexes (HIs). Feature engineering is the process of transforming
the data into meaningful variables for analysis. Features convey the
embedded value or important information in the data. The features are
typically a set of HIs (HIs) which can be categorized into two groups:
Physical HIs (PHI) and Virtual HIs (VHD [54]. The selected HIs are will
be used by the developed models and perform real-time assessment of
subsystems health in the framework application stage.

PHIs are related to the physics of failures and generally having a
meaningful interpretation, such as the monotonic changes in the time
domain features (kurtosis, skewness, crest factor, etc.) which can be
extracted from the vibration signals of a degrading bearing [55]. VHIs
are HIs that have established predictive value but which do not have
clear interpretability (e.g., parameters obtained from machine learning
models or those that are a fusion of multiple PHIs or multi-sensor sig-
nals).

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107194

OE

 

 

Fig. 6. Abstract representation of system logic model developed by applying
the framework. The model encodes relationships between the extracted features
or Health Indexes (HI), Subsystem Health Indicators (SHI;) which are de-
termined by deep learning models, a set of Mediating variables (M), and CES
health indexes (CHIs). By taking into account all the CHIs the probability of
failure in for the whole CES can be obtained.

4.1.4. System-level analysis

The purpose of this step is to provide the perspective on how di-
agnoses and prognoses from the subsystem level can impact CES
functions, and manifest in system-level failures and consequences. This
step is informed by four of the main activities from PRA. This step in-
volves system failure scenario development (which includes initiating
events identification) and logic modeling for various conditions,
wherein the causal chain from initiating events to consequences is es-
tablished. This includes modeling subsystem success and failure logic as
it relates to system-level success and failures. These models by in-
corporating information such as system architecture. The developed
logic model would capture interdependencies among subsystems, and
would be quantified using various sources and formats of data. The
model would be updatable in the framework application steps. This
completed system logic model explains how a fault can propagate
throughout the system and can be used for inferring the root causes or
the origin of any anomalous behavior.

Depending on the objective of analysis, logic model would be con-
structed with FT or ET, or more advanced methods like probabilistic
graphical models like Bayesian networks (BNs) [18,56] and its exten-
sions like DBN [57] and OOBN [58], graph theory, complex networks
[59]. In Fig. 6 we illustrate the framework as a BN, which will allow
forward- and backward-propagation of information to enable diag-
nostic and prognostic reasoning about the system. In this framework,
the extracted features are used by trained deep learning models to es-
timate a Subsystem Health Indicator (SHI), then the BN implements the
CES logic (architecture, function, failure, etc.) by using a set of Med-
iating variables (M), a number of CES Health Indicators (CHI) would
then be produced to ultimately provide us with an overarching CES
R. Moradi and K.M. Groth

health level. It may also possible to consider other approaches like
parity relations [60], bond graphs, and signed digraphs (SDGs) [61], or
Petri nets [7]. An important consideration when developing such
models is balancing the level of detail in the models, the size and
number of subsystems and data sources incorporated, while keeping the
model complexity manageable.

Determination of the system performance criteria is the last task of
the system-level analysis. Considering a CES with both PRA and PHM
perspectives, the system performance criteria would include PRA
measures such as tolerable operational risk threshold, as well as system-
level PHM measures including CES efficiency, energy consumption,
pollution, products quality if applicable, and rate of occurrence of
failure relative to other similar systems which can reveal errors in a CES
that may not be discoverable using the bottom-up approach explained
earlier and thus are worth considering and monitoring.

Ultimately, a dynamic risk assessment framework for the system
under study, would be the product of all the above-mentioned steps.

4.2. Framework application

After the framework is constructed, it can be applied to provide
decision support. This entails collecting the online operational data,
manipulating it, and then passing it into the developed framework,
which can then be executed to provide updated, condition-specific in-
stances of the models.

4.2.1. Data collection

In this step, which is drawn directly from PHM, operational data is
collected for the subsystems which are being monitored. Data collection
in CES usually is done through a network of a large number of different
types of sensors distributed across the system as well as other types of
data sources. This network is often associated with a distributed data
storage and pre-processing/control units. The collected passes through
many connections and middleware and therefore it is crucial to guar-
antee that the data is being reliably transmitted, and received at the
destination in a timely manner.

Also, the collected data should be properly stored for future analysis
and model updating since as the system operates we would have access
to higher amounts of data and therefore higher accuracy levels can be
achieved in framework iterations over time. Since we are dealing with
industrial big data, the five Vs [62] of big data must be considered for
proper storage:

e Volume: proper storage capacity

e Variety: proper categorization and structuring of the stored data
(human inputs, operation data, events and failures, maintenance,
performance decay scenarios, etc.)

e Velocity: high data storage and access speed

e Value: storing only the most valuable data

e Veracity: making sure the collected data is correct and accurate
before storage

4.2.2. Data manipulation

In this step, the data is manipulated to make it ready to be used in
the diagnosis and prognosis models. It involves two main tasks which
are drawn from PHM: data pre-processing and feature extraction. Data
pre-processing involves cleaning, normalization, and integration of
streaming operation data before using it for further assessment. This
also includes handling missing values and sensor disagreements and
data reduction in such a way that enables further computation that
maximizes computational efficiency and minimizes possibility of in-
troducing errors into the data analysis. Feature extraction is the real-
time process of transforming the pre-processed operation data into
Health Indexes that are used in the diagnostics and prognostics models.

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107194

4.2.3. Subsystem-level assessment

In this step the developed models from Section 4.1.3 are used to
perform diagnostics and prognostics on subsystems using the streaming
operation data. Each subsystem has its own specific trained set of
models designed to work with the type of data collected. In some cases,
a subsystem have a combined diagnostics and prognostics model, in
other cases the subsystem may have two separate models.

Diagnostics models continuously monitor the operation of the sub-
systems to detect faults/anomalies, isolate the faulty/anomalous com-
ponent(s), conduct failure mode and failure mechanism identification,
and root cause analysis. On the other hand, prognostics models predict
the time at which a subsystem or a component will no longer perform as
intended and needed. In addition to RUL estimation, computing the
probability of failure and relative likelihood of different failure modes
are another prognostic tasks at this point.

4.2.4. System logic model

The model developed in Section 4.1.4, which brings together all
individual subsystem-level assessments considering all the known in-
teractions and relations among subsystems, is then used to pass the
information from subsystems into a system-level indication of system’s
health or system’s operation risks. This combination of the system logic
model or models and subsystem-level assessments enables the system-
level assessment (this combination is shown with a gray box in Fig. 4).

4.2.5. System-level assessment

This is the step where the model is used to obtain insights about the
health and risk of the system and subsystems. The CES operation and
condition is monitored, and health/risk of operation of the CES are assessed
and predicted considering all subsystem-level assessments and interactions
among subsystems at different levels represented in the logic model. At this
point we would know the state of the whole CES by knowing the state of all
individual subsystems, have an estimate of when the CES will no longer be
operational by fusion of subsystems assessments results. In case of the CES
being faulty we would know the possible root causes, severity, and how
possibly that fault would propagate throughout the system by forward/
backward inference through the logic model. As explained, Fig. 6 demon-
strates a possible architecture for health assessment of a CES.

As far as the system-level prognostics is concerned, following the
same architecture of Fig. 6, one can perform prognostics individually on
subsystems and use the logic model as a mean to fuse all these results as
shown in Fig. 7.

Ultimately, the outcome of the mentioned assessments will be used
as inputs and support for decision making.

 
 

 
   

~
~

poms naad= : et s, poms nadaseaasaaa= —~
\

ME

CES logic model

Subsystems health Subsystems health
indicator at t, indicator at t,
IL, Deep learning-based prognostics J

Fig. 7. Demonstration of system-level prognostics approach using deep learning
for subsystems prognostics and logic models for estimating the CES probability
of failure in the next time steps.

 

ose”

®Tnsaea ee ee eee eee

CES logic model

eee ee

eee
ee ee ee ee ee

tale

-
4
Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107194

R. Moradi and K.M. Groth

x xX

otvsy SS

OX xX xX

OxO
+> sy “NS

x xX oO
ss xX

0
x

i
x

‘

OO~s

soT]sOusOIg JuaUIssassy
ystu/WyeeH ystu/WyeeH

JUSUISsessy [AAd]-Wa}shg

xO xX O X

x xX

x
x
x

sisATeuy
aouenbasuoy

ss

“xy. Ss xX

+> sy

Ss xX X

a
a
a

[PPO II80_T
wayshs

Ox

x s+ ss xX

x xX

i
x

‘

yusuidojaaeq
OLIeUd9S

SISATeUY [eAd]-Wa}SAS

x / /
x / /
x x i
x / /
x / /
© © /
© © ©
x x O
Xx - ©
/ / O
Xx - ©
x x x
x vs x
/ / x
/ / /
x / /
/ / x
x x x
O x x
/ / x
yusudojaaeq

sorsousolg sosouseiq pue 8UulUIeI], [apo]
sisAyeuy

JUSUIssassy [AAV]-WasAsqns [PA2]-WaysAsqns

“xy +++ SYS

a i a

x

i
x

‘

a8pa|MOuy
SULID0UISUY

sss UNS XKYSY UNS

s xs

ss xX

x
x

‘

asequyeq
[eo1101sTH

xs+ry+ s+s+s+s+ SS

+ ss x xs S

x

i
x

‘

e}eq uoTeIsdO
oul[uO

UOT}eT[0D eIed

vad

Vad
JUsUIssasse

YSII peseq-8uluses] daaq
SISOUSPIP JUSPIIIV

vud

vud

uonotpeid TAY

wajshs ‘sisouseip [neq
uonde}ep Ine
yusussasse Aj]IGe[IeAV
AVTIGeTaI

Jeuorj}ouny we}sAs

Jo uoT}oIpeid 29 UOT eUITISy
suLIO}IUOUI

Yyeey weayshs sut}-[eoy
yusussasse Ajayes W9}shS
SISOUSOIg

pour sIN]TejJ-DIN
uonensyed

TAY pue ATIqeloy
stsousoid ain{Iey suTTUO
sIsOUseIp }[NeY OUIT}-[eaYy
uoTjo1peid

TINY [easy-Wia31shS
suLIO}IUOUI

paezey ‘joruo0s Ayayes
suruueyd sueuajureyy]
stsousoid Ajayes

2at00fqO

[8]
[9]

lot]
[6]
Lr]
[S]

61]
[12]
[ST]

LOT]

[ZT]
[Z]

LOZ]
[7T]
[vT]
[st]
[eT]

le]

[TT]
[7]

Jadeg

‘77 pue [°z suolses url YyJdep UT passnosip ore sioded assay} Jo [TY ‘UoTeJepisuod Tensed smoyseE pue ‘ySe} Jey} poJepIsuod
jou savy Avy} Jey} sueaurx “Yse} Jey} patapisuod savy Ady} Jey} smoYs A *yJOMaUTeI ay} JO UoTepTyea JAoddns pure ssovaatsusyaidulod 9}e1]suOWap 0} yOmouteY pasodoid ay} Jo syUsuaya ysuTese YOM payerar jo surddey]

aC LAR
R. Moradi and K.M. Groth

4.3. Framework validation

To verify that our framework contains the necessary elements, and
to validate its comprehensiveness and extended perspective, the twenty
most relevant papers discussed in Section 2 are mapped onto the main
elements of the proposed framework in Table 2. As shown, none of the
existing studies capture all of the elements in our framework. Many
studies do not use all the available information sources, with many
focusing on either online data or historical data and engineering
knowledge, but not both. Model training and development is neglected
in several papers. Consequence analysis cannot be found in a majority
of the identified studies. In many studies there is not a clear distinction
and emphasis of subsystem-level and system-level analysis and assess-
ment does not exist.

5. Discussion and conclusion

In this study, we proposed a new risk assessment framework that
integrates PHM and PRA techniques and concepts. In a sense, we are
presenting a hybrid model, one that uses the sum of advantages of both
PHM and PRA to provide a forward-looking approach to risk assessment
for complex engineering systems. This work is the first to draw together
these two distinct disciplines systematically combining these techniques
into a new framework. In doing so, we have laid out the core elements
of a more comprehensive approach that is data-informed and model-
informed, and scalable to complex systems. We validated the metho-
dology by carefully reviewing the literature and mapping our frame-
work against elements contained in the most related published work.

There are a few limitations that worth discussing. In this paper, we
have assumed that data is available for the CES under study and this
data can be real or the result of an accurate simulation. There are ex-
isting issues with real data availability and accurate simulation of CES.
However, addressing these issues are complementary to this study and
this study provides further motivation for increasing the accuracy of
those simulations. Also, we proposed the integration of systems logic
models with deep learning models for subsystems diagnostics and
prognostics. This approach does not fully solve problems such as scal-
ability of some logic models like BNs. However, it would considerably
reduce the size of logic models and therefore make them more com-
putationally manageable; allowing us to model larger and more com-
plex systems. Additionally, we have not created a full implementation
of the proposed method on a real-world complex system in this
manuscript. However, doing so is our next step and the results will be
published in a follow-up article.

In light of these limitations, we put forward the following future
research directions that will benefit this framework and the overall
concept of CES risk and reliability assessment:

i Logic models: research on the integration of deep learning models
and the mentioned logic models. Also, development of novel and
computationally efficient methods of logic models constructions
and/or learning, inference, and updating.

Deep learning: research on reduction of training data volume and

labeling requirements, development of physics-informed deep

learning models, and applicability of transfer learning in reliability
engineering.

Developing metrics for assessing performance of the framework:

performance must be seen as a balance between computational ef-

ficiency, accuracy, precision, and must also consider the data re-
quirements imposed by the algorithms.

iv Application in specific problems and system types: this paper es-
tablishes a conceptual basis for future relevant studies and calls for
PRA and PHM experts to join forces and tackle the novel challenges
in reliability engineering.

hme

i

iii

To conclude, we have introduced a systematic integration of PHM

10

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107194

and PRA for the purpose of complex engineering systems risk and re-
liability assessment and prediction. The product of this integration is
both a risk-informed PHM and a data-driven PRA approach for CES.
Advantages and contributions of this framework are using all sources of
information, the capability of multi-level assessment and prediction,
the introduction of deep learning into engineering systems risk assess-
ment and prediction, and holistic view and therefore more convenient
decision making. Also, this framework can be re-structured to be ap-
plicable on various CES, can be updated whenever there is new in-
formation/data available or when the system has minor changes.

Declaration of Competing Interest

This work was supported in part under award 31310018M0043
from the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. The statements, fndings,
conclusions, and recommendations are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the view of the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission.

Acknowledgement

This work was supported in part under award 31310018M0043
from the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. The statements, find-
ings, conclusions, and recommendations are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the view of the US Nuclear Regulatory
Commission.

References

[1] Farsi MA, Zio E. Industry 4.0: some challenges and opportunities for reliability
engineering. Int J Reliab Risk Saf Theory Appl 2019.

Hu J, Zhang L, Ma L, Liang W. An integrated safety prognosis model for complex
system based on dynamic Bayesian network and ant colony algorithm. Expert Syst
Appl 2011;38(3):1431-46.

Favaro FM, Saleh JH. Toward risk assessment 2.0: safety supervisory control and
model-based hazard monitoring for risk-informed safety interventions. Reliab Eng
Syst Saf 2016;152:316-30.

Zeng Z, Zio E. Dynamic risk assessment based on statistical failure data and con-
dition-monitoring degradation data. IEEE Trans Reliab 2018;67(2):609-22.

Kim H, Kim JT, Heo G. Failure rate updates using condition-based prognostics in
probabilistic safety assessments. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2018;175:225-33.

Xing J, Zeng Z, Zio E. A framework for dynamic risk assessment with condition
monitoring data and inspection data. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2019;191:106552.

Kabir S, Walker M, Papadopoulos Y. Dynamic system safety analysis in hip-hops
with petri nets and Bayesian networks. Saf Sci 2018;105:55-70.

Taleb-Berrouane M, Khan F, Amyotte P. Bayesian stochastic petri nets (BSPN)-a new
modelling tool for dynamic safety and reliability analysis. Reliab Eng Syst Saf
2020;193:106587.

Groth KM, Denman MR, Jones TB, Darling MC, Luger GF. Building and using dy-
namic risk-informed diagnosis procedures for complex system accidents. Proc Inst
Mech Eng Part O 2020;234(1):193-207. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1748006X18803836.

Paltrinieri N, Comfort L, Reniers G. Learning about risk: machine learning for risk
assessment. Saf Sci 2019;118:475-86.

Rodrigues LR, Gomes JP, Ferri FA, Medeiros IP, Galvao RK, Jtinior CLN. Use of PHM
information and system architecture for optimized aircraft maintenance planning.
IEEE Syst J 2014;9(4):1197-207.

Liu J, Zio E. System dynamic reliability assessment and failure prognostics. Reliab
Eng Syst Saf 2017;160:21-36.

Khorasgani H, Biswas G, Sankararaman S. Methodologies for system-level re-
maining useful life prediction. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2016;154:8-18.

Abu-Samah A, Shahzad MK, Zamai E. Bayesian based methodology for the extrac-
tion and validation of time bound failure signatures for online failure prediction.
Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2017;167:616-28.

Amin MT, Khan F, Imtiaz S. Dynamic availability assessment of safety critical sys-
tems using a dynamic Bayesian network. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2018;178:108-17.
Rebello S, Yu H, Ma L. An integrated approach for system functional reliability
assessment using dynamic Bayesian network and hidden Markov model. Reliab Eng
Syst Saf 2018;180:124-35.

Iamsumang C, Mosleh A, Modarres M. Monitoring and learning algorithms for
dynamic hybrid Bayesian network in on-line system health management applica-
tions. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2018;178:118-29.

Cai B, Liu H, Xie M. A real-time fault diagnosis methodology of complex systems
using object-oriented Bayesian networks. Mech Syst Signal Process 2016;80:31-44.
Zhang L, Zhang X, Hu J, Liu H. A comprehensive method for safety management of
a complex pump injection system used for shale-gas well fracturing. Process Saf
Environ Prot 2018;120:370-87.

Blancke O, Tahan A, Komljenovic D, Amyot N, Lévesque M, Hudon C. A holistic

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]
R. Moradi and K.M. Groth

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]
[27]

[28]

[29]
[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

multi-failure mode prognosis approach for complex equipment. Reliab Eng Syst Saf
2018;180:136-51.

Ren H, Chai Y, Qu J, Ye X, Tang Q. A novel adaptive fault detection methodology
for complex system using deep belief networks and multiple models: a case study on
cryogenic propellant loading system. Neurocomputing 2018;275:2111-25.
Rasmussen N. Reactor safety study: an assessment of accident risks in u.s. com-
mercial nuclear power plants. Tech. Rep.. U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission;
1975.

Villa V, Paltrinieri N, Khan F, Cozzani V. Towards dynamic risk analysis: a review of
the risk assessment approach and its limitations in the chemical process industry.
Saf Sci 2016;89:77-93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2016.06.002.

Zio E. Integrated deterministic and probabilistic safety assessment: concepts,
challenges, research directions. Nucl Eng Des 2014;280:413-9. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.nucengdes.2014.09.004.

Aldemir T. A survey of dynamic methodologies for probabilistic safety assessment
of nuclear power plants. Annals of Nuclear Energy 2013;52:113-24. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.anucene.2012.08.001. Nuclear Reactor Safety Simulation and
Uncertainty Analysis

Zio E. The future of risk assessment. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2018;177:176-90.
Mosleh A. PRA: a perspective on strengths, current limitations, and possible im-
provements. Nucl Eng Technol 2014;46(1):1-10. https://doi.org/10.5516/NET.03.
2014.700.

Siu N, Marksberry D, Cooper S, Coyne K, Stutzke M. PSA technology challenges
revealed by the great east Japan earthquake. Proceedings of the PSAM topical
conference in light of the Fukushima Dai-Ichi Accident. 2013.

Aven T. Quantitative risk assessment: the scientific platform. Cambridge University
Press; 2011.

Modarres M. Risk analysis in engineering: techniques, tools, and trends. CRC press;
2006.

Xia T, Dong Y, Xiao L, Du S, Pan E, Xi L. Recent advances in prognostics and health
management for advanced manufacturing paradigms. Reliab Eng Syst Saf
2018;178:255-68.

Islam MM, Kim J-M. Reliable multiple combined fault diagnosis of bearings using
heterogeneous feature models and multiclass support vector machines. Reliab Eng
Syst Saf 2019;184:55-66.

Li H, Sun J, Ma H, Tian Z, Li Y. A novel method based upon modified composite
spectrum and relative entropy for degradation feature extraction of hydraulic
pump. Mech Syst Signal Process 2019;114:399-412.

Yuan T, Wu X, Bae SJ, Zhu X. Reliability assessment of a continuous-state fuel cell
stack system with multiple degrading components. Reliab Eng Syst Saf
2019;189:157-64.

Ruiz-Tagle Palazuelos A, Lépez Droguett E. System-level prognostics and health
management: a graph neural network based framework. ProcInst Mech Eng Part O
2020.

Coble J, Ramuhalli P, Bond LJ, Hines J, Ipadhyaya B. A review of prognostics and
health management applications in nuclear power plants. Int J Progn Health
Manage 2015;6:16-37.

Atamuradov V, Medjaher K, Dersin P, Lamoureux B, Zerhouni N. Prognostics and
health management for maintenance practitioners-review, implementation and
tools evaluation. Int J Progn Health Manage 2017;8(060):1-31.

Assaf R, Do P, Scarf P, Nefti-Meziani S. Diagnosis for systems with multi-component
wear interactions. 2017 IEEE International conference on prognostics and health
management (ICPHM). IEEE; 2017. p. 96-102.

Kim N-H, An D, Choi J-H. Prognostics and health management of engineering
systems: an introduction. Springer; 2016.

Lee J, Wu F, Zhao W, Ghaffari M, Liao L, Siegel D. Prognostics and health man-
agement design for rotary machinery systems—reviews, methodology and applica-
tions. Mech Syst Signal Process 2014;42(1-2):314-34.

11

[41]

[42]

[43]
[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]
[60]
[61]

[62]

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 204 (2020) 107194

Fang X, Gebraeel NZ, Paynabar K. Scalable prognostic models for large-scale con-
dition monitoring applications. IISE Trans 2017;49(7):698-710.

Sakurahara T, Schumock G, Reihani S, Kee E, Mohaghegh Z. Simulation-informed
probabilistic methodology for common cause failure analysis. Reliab Eng Syst Saf
2019;185:84—99.

An D, Kim NH, Choi J-H. Practical options for selecting data-driven or physics-based
prognostics algorithms with reviews. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2015;133:223-36.

Khan S, Yairi T. A review on the application of deep learning in system health
management. Mech Syst Signal Process 2018;107:241-65.

Chen C, Vachtsevanos G, Orchard ME. Machine remaining useful life prediction: an
integrated adaptive neuro-fuzzy and high-order particle filtering approach. Mech
Syst Signal Process 2012;28:597-607.

Liu D, Pang J, Zhou J, Peng Y, Pecht M. Prognostics for state of health estimation of
lithium-ion batteries based on combination gaussian process functional regression.
Microelectron Reliab 2013;53(6):832-9.

Le Son K, Fouladirad M, Barros A. Remaining useful lifetime estimation and noisy
gamma deterioration process. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2016;149:76-87.

Si X-S, Wang W, Hu C-H, Chen M-Y, Zhou D-H. A wiener-process-based degradation
model with a recursive filter algorithm for remaining useful life estimation. Mech
Syst Signal Process 2013;35(1-2):219-37.

Tobon-Mejia DA, Medjaher K, Zerhouni N, Tripot G. A data-driven failure prog-
nostics method based on mixture of Gaussian hidden Markov models. IEEE Trans
Reliab 2012;61(2):491-503.

Ruiz-Tagle Palazuelos A, L6pez Droguett E, Pascual R. A novel deep capsule neural
network for remaining useful life estimation. Proc Inst MechEng Part O
2020;234(1):151-67.

Verstraete D, Droguett E, Modarres M. A deep adversarial approach based on multi-
sensor fusion for semi-supervised remaining useful life prognostics. Sensors
2020;20(1):176.

Sun Q, Liu Y, Chua T-S, Schiele B. Meta-transfer learning for few-shot learning.
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
2019. p. 403-12.

Baraldi P, Compare M, Sauco S, Zio E. Ensemble neural network-based particle
filtering for prognostics. Mech Syst Signal Process 2013;41(1-2):288-300.

Lei Y, Li N, Guo L, Li N, Yan T, Lin J. Machinery health prognostics: a systematic
review from data acquisition to RUL prediction. Mech Syst Signal Process
2018;104:799-834.

Ali JB, Fnaiech N, Saidi L, Chebel-Morello B, Fnaiech F. Application of empirical
mode decomposition and artificial neural network for automatic bearing fault di-
agnosis based on vibration signals. Appl Acoust 2015;89:16-27.

Byun J-E, Zwirglmaier K, Straub D, Song J. Matrix-based Bayesian network for ef-
ficient memory storage and flexible inference. Reliab Eng Syst Saf
2019;185:533-45.

Kammouh O, Gardoni P, Cimellaro GP. Probabilistic framework to evaluate the
resilience of engineering systems using bayesian and dynamic bayesian networks.
Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2020;198:106813.

Costa R, Haukaas T, Chang SE, Dowlatabadi H. Object-oriented model of the seismic
vulnerability of the fuel distribution network in coastal british columbia. Reliab Eng
Syst Saf 2019;186:11-23.

Lambiotte R, Rosvall M, Scholtes I. From networks to optimal higher-order models
of complex systems. Nat Phys 2019:1.

Odendaal HM, Jones T. Actuator fault detection and isolation: an optimised parity
space approach. Control Eng Pract 2014;26:222-32.

Chatti N, Ould-Bouamama B, Gehin A-L, Merzouki R. Signed bond graph for mul-
tiple faults diagnosis. Eng Appl Artif Intell 2014;36:134-47.

Yin S, Kaynak O. Big data for modern industry: challenges and trends [point of
view]. Proc IEEE 2015;103(2):143-6.
