 

www.nature.com/scientificdata

SCIENTIFIC DATA:

OPEN :

DATA DESCRIPTOR |

A multilayer and spatial description
of the Erasmus mobility network

Laszl6 Gadar@®?:?"*, Zsolt T. Kosztyan*°>, Andras Telcs@***” & Janos Abonyi@®*”

The Erasmus Programme is the biggest collaboration network consisting of European Higher Education
Institutions (HEIs). The flows of students, teachers and staff form directed and weighted networks

> that connect institutions, regions and countries. Here, we present a linked and manually verified

dataset of this multiplex, multipartite, multi-labelled, spatial network. We enriched the network with
institutional socio-economic data from the European Tertiary Education Register (ETER) and the Global
Research Identifier Database (GRID). We geocoded the headquarters of institutions and characterised
the attractiveness and quality of their environments based on Points of Interest (POI) data. The linked
datasets provide relevant information to grasp a more comprehensive understanding of the mobility
patterns and attractiveness of the institutions.

Background & Summary

The Erasmus programme is the biggest collaboration network of European higher education institutions (HEIs).
The flows of students, teachers and staff form directed and weighted networks that connect institutes, regions
and countries. The properties of the institution-level collaboration network were investigated by several empir-
ical self-assessment studies'°. Regional and national connections were analyzed by gravity models*~® and the
generalized method of moments’ to explore the economic background of the connections. The structure of the
network was also compared to other collaboration networks to understand the nature of such mobilities®*. Only
two analyses focus on the topological properties of contract- and flow- networks of the European HEIs”’°. We
assume that this gap is due to the lack of a properly merged, standardized and cleaned database.

A linked and manually verified dataset of the mobility between European higher education institutions (HEIs)
as a multiplex, multipartite, multi-labelled, spatial network is presented. The dataset enriches the Erasmus mobil-
ity data with the connection between institutional variables of the European Tertiary Education Register (ETER)
(https://www.eter-project.com) and the Global Research Identifier Database (GRID) (https://www.grid.ac) as well
as the nearest points of interest (POI) (see Fig. 1).

This work presents the accurate identification and geocoding of the institutions, the integration of
institutional- as well as regional economic data, and the manual verification of information sources. The linking
of the databases greatly enriches their applicability. Erasmus data define the network of mobilities and show to
what extent institutions play a sending or receiving role in the Erasmus programme. The ETER database facilitates
the mobilities to be related to the number of students as well as lecturers and the budget of the institutions. The
Global Research Identifier Database (GRID) links the institutions to research-related networks. The factors that
determine the quality of life and tourism attractiveness of HEIs can be measured based on the points of interest
(POI) dataset representing the neighbourhood of the geocoded locations.

The proposed integrated and validated network data can be used for profiling HEIs, studying socio-economic
factors of mobility and measuring their attractivity based on the number of incoming students and lecturers. The
understanding of the mechanisms, patterns and driving forces behind mobilities is a significant area of research
as the development of integrated higher education is one of the focuses of the European Union!’ and most of the
higher education ranking systems take into account the internationalization of HEIs.

Mobility networks can be considered as a multidimensional network where dimensions on edges originate
from categorical variables, e.g. subject area, study level of students, participant type, of the mobility database.
The attractiveness of nodes can be expressed in terms of a number of socioeconomic indicators and calculated

1MTA-PE Budapest Ranking Research Group, University of Pannonia, Veszprém, Hungary. “Institute of Advanced
Studies (iASK), Koszeg, Hungary. ?Innopod Solutions Kft., Budapest, Hungary. *MTA-PE “Lendulet” Complex
Systems Monitoring Research Group, University of Pannonia, Veszprém, Hungary. °Department of Quantitative
Methods, University of Pannonia, Veszprém, Hungary. °Wigner Research Center for Physics, Budapest, Hungary.
IAS - Virtual Institute of Advanced Studies, Budapest, Hungary. *email: janos@abonyilab.com

 

SCIENTIFICDATA| (2020) 7:41 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0382-1 1
www.nature.com/scientificdata/

 

1,162,429 students
194,349 teachers
58,953 staff

6 study years

5157 HEls

3591 active this term

eno
a

5 study years
ris?

C
3043 HEls eo

 

2317 connected a soe
to Erasmus HEls

47,329 istitutes

in Erasmus region
2,097 connected
to Erasmus HEls

   

4,806 HEls
POI environment
4 type (extendable)

Fig. 1 Schematic overview of the integrated higher education mobility dataset. The linked databases and their
main features as well as the possibility of using the merged dataset for multiple purposes are presented on the
left- and right-hand sides of the diagram, respectively.

measures’? that require additional sources of information. The database provides the opportunity to ask such
valuable research questions to which the repertoire of the multidimensional network analysis can yield valua-
ble answers. Related analytical methods are developing very rapidly'*. Advanced methods exist to statistically
evaluate motifs’, communities'’®'” and dyads'® of networks with categorical and continuous labels on nodes and
edges’”.

Moreover, as the geographic location of network nodes has been determined, the Erasmus exchange network
has become a spatial network, therefore, its special structural features, e.g. deterrence function, distant-dependent
clustering coefficient, can be detected””.

As the duration of the openly available mobility programme is six years, it can be interpreted as a temporal net-
work. Although the time window of the network is too small to identify major changes in deeper socio-economic
processes as the number of mobilities increases significantly every year, the analysis of this growing network
might be an exciting topic of research.

Methods

Integration and reconciliation of heterogeneous data sources. By recognizing the need for and
possibility of linking institutions in the form of multilayer spatial networks, a linked dataset, as depicted in Fig. 2,
has been designed in order to determine mobility patterns at the institutional level. In the resulting network,
information about edges is given from the Erasmus mobility data and the nodes are derived from various data
sources. The requirement is for data sources to be as complete, comprehensive, administrative, reliable and ver-
ifiable as possible as well as openly available to researchers. The ETER, GRID and POI databases that have been
chosen meet these requirements.

Linking databases and creating interfaces were major challenges. The identification of institutional data in
different databases was required to achieve the connected database structure.

The Methods section is organized as follows. First, how created self-consistency for 6-year Erasmus mobility
data are described. By taking into consideration the data content of the variables in different data tables, the
mobility databases have been standardized and merged into one database. The unknown geographic location
of Erasmus institutes brought about the need to geocode them. The next subsection discusses the geocoding
procedure and counting method of different kinds of the nearest POIs that surround HEIs. Afterwards, how the
interface between the institutions in the Erasmus and ETER databases was created is described. Finally, how the
GRID and Erasmus institutional data is connected is described.

Cleaning the Erasmus mobility data. Mobility databases were published annually until 2014 in the EU
Open Data Portal using different data formats and headers. According to the type of participants (students, teach-
ers, staff) three separate mobility datasets were published annually*!~°. The procedure of cleaning and merging
the data tables that cover six years of mobilities is documented in the file l1-erasmus edgelist merge __
clean. Rmd which is an integral part of this work.

The number of rows in mobility databases was compared with official statistics from the Directorate General
for Education and Culture (DG EAC) of the European Commission (see Table 1).

The formation of the networked dataset continued with the consolidation of the set of HEIs. The EU Open
Data Portal provides a list of HEIs that participate in the Erasmus programme but these data tables are not entirely
consistent and do not contain all HEIs that send or receive any type of participant in the Erasmus mobility pro-
gramme, therefore, the list of 4,919 institutions was extended by 230 HEIs that were not included in the official
database but participated in the exchange programme according to the mobility databases. However, 1,566 HEIs
did not send to or receive from HEIs any participants in the Erasmus programme between 2008 and 2014.

 

SCIENTIFICDATA| (2020) 7:41 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0382-1 2
www.nature.com/scientificdata/

 

Gender
Nationality
Seniority
Category of work

  
       
   
   
       
     
   
  

  

Gender
Nationality
Subject
Seniority

Level

School year
Length in days
Length in hours
Language
Subject
Subsistence

Participant type
Category of training
School year
From-to date
Length in days
Language
Subsitence

[:STAFF_OWT]

 

[: STAFF_IN]

 

[:LOCATED_IN]

 
   
   
 

[:LOCATED_IN]
Properties

Geocodes

  

Erasmus_id
Geocodes
NUTS 3 code
ETER_id
GRID_id

      
 
         
   
   
   
 
 
 
     

Gender
Age
Nationality
Level
School year
Duration
Language
Credit
Subject
Grant

 
  
 
  
  
   
  
  

  
 

ETER_id
Students
Graduates
Staff
Finance

 
 
 
 
  
  
 

 
   
  

GRID_id
Wikidata
OpenRef
Basic info

   
  
       
   
   

  

Erasmus_id
Bar

Food
Culture
Green

Fig. 2 The structure of linked data.

In the student mobility database 837 (0.07%) sending and 2,337 (0.02%) receiving HEIs are unknown, in the
teacher mobility database 353 (0.1%) sending and 551 (0.2%) receiving HEIs are unknown, and in the staff mobil-
ity database 103 (0.1%) sending and 195 (0.2%) receiving HEIs are unknown, however, the country of origin or
destination is known. To handle these connections, 31’unknown’ HEIs with the capital of the country of origin
were defined and these travels remained in the mobility database. Apart from the HEis of unknown origin or
destination, other information is known about travels.

Mobilities for work placement purposes have been filtered out because the destinations (companies) are very
diffuse and the formulation of adequate research questions is hindered by numerous limitations.

Geocoding and POlenrichment. The geographic location of the institutions facilitates the formation and
analysis of spatial networks. The precise geocodes of HEIs enables points of interest (POI) in the neighbourhood
to be searched for to characterize their social, economic and cultural environment. The number of adjacent POIs
can be used as an indicator of the HEIs, to determine how they are embedded in the local economic network or
how the community of HEIs generates local activities.

The manual verification of longitudinal and latitudinal information concerning HEIs in the ETER data-
base showed that this information is inaccurate (further details in the next subsection). Moreover, not all of the
Erasmus HEIs can be found in the ETER database. Therefore, even though the ETER and Erasmus HEIs databases
were linked, this was unsatisfactory. As a result, all of the Erasmus institutions had to be geocoded.

The Google Places and Google Geocoding APIs services were used to harvest geocodes of HEIs. Small and
closed institutes are not classified in the Google Places API, therefore, the Google Geocoding API was used with
a textual search. Despite all efforts, the geocodes of 43 institutions remained unknown. These HEIs are likely to
have closed or merged with others as they could not be found using Google search engine. To handle these cases,
the GPS coordinates of their (and all HEIs’) city centres were also determined. Of the 43 HEIs, only 16 partici-
pated in Erasmus mobility between 2008 and 2014.

Although universities may have campuses in cities other than their headquarters, campus-relevant informa-
tion is not given in the Erasmus dataset. Therefore, we fine-tuned the dataset to be coherent in terms of verifying
that the places marked by the determined GPS coordinates are situated in the city of the headquarters of the uni-
versities. The assignment of exact geographic locations to institutions is essential to determine accurate inferences
when using data later. Potential bias may be due to the inaccuracy of the database behind the geocoding APIs as
well as changes (relocation, closure, merger) concerning institutions.

 

SCIENTIFICDATA| (2020) 7:41 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0382-1 3
www.nature.com/scientificdata/

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Student 167,413 168,193°!
2008/2009 Teacher 28,330 28,615°!
Staff 5,888 7,774!
Student 177,069 177,705°?
2009/2010 Teacher 28,772 29,031°?
Staff 6,910 8,745
Student 189,914 190,498°3
2010/2011 Teacher 31,265 31,617
Staff 8,469 11,196*
Student 204,306 204,744*4
2011/2012 Teacher 32,901 33,3184
Staff 9,868 13,204**
Student 211,519 212,522
2012/2013 Teacher 35,543 36,075°°
Staff 12,908 16,549°°
Student 212,208 212,208°°
2013/2014 Teacher 37,538 38,108°°
Staff 14,910 19,380°°
Student 1,162,429 1,165,870
Total Teacher 194,349 196,764
Staff 58,953 76,848

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 1. Number of rows in mobility databases compared with official statistics.

Cece cere eee eee seers eeeeeeeessseeeeeseeeeseseeeseeeeeseeeeeeseeessseeeseeseeseeseeeseseseeeeseeeeeeeeseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeresereeeeeresesereeeeere

Nearby POIs were merged with Erasmus HEIs using the HERE Places (Search) API. POIs relevant to HEIs in
the neighbourhood of the institutions were counted. POIs were classified as Bar (e.g. pubs), Food (e.g. fast food
restaurants, bakeries), Culture (e.g. museums, theatres), Green (e.g. parks). These POIs indicate factors which
complement traditional university life.

Linking the ETER database. The European Tertiary Education Register (ETER) is a project funded by the
Joint Research Centre and Directorate General for Education and Culture of the European Commission, which
aims to construct a register of European HEIs and collect a comparable set of indicators and characterize HEIs
according to their main activities. The partners of the project started the data acquisition process in 2013 and the
project will be complemented at the end of 2019. The data is freely available for research purposes.

Annually the database provides 519 variables of the institutions, e.g. the number of students, graduates as well
as academic and non-academic staff, expenditure and revenue. The quality of data and the incompleteness of the
records vary from country to country. The database contains all HEIs that consist of more than 200 students and
30 full-time members of staff but excludes institutions that deliver only professional degrees (ISCED level 5).

Even though the Erasmus ID is included in the ETER database, several HEIs in the Erasmus database cannot
be matched directly to the ETER dataset, as several HEIs have more than one Erasmus ID in the Erasmus database
or are missing altogether. Furthermore, some of the ETER IDs had been modified over time.

By recognizing the inaccuracies in the ETER database, it was necessary to recreate the Erasmus - ETER con-
nections. Among the methods considered, the adjacent locations were used as a primary linking procedure and
the linking of textual information as a validation method.

The main uncertainty of the method is the change in the name of HEIs resulting from the merger or transfor-
mation of faculties and/or institutions. In addition,uncertainties may exist about different administrative policies
on changeable higher education. Erasmus stores data on institutions as they enter the programme on a permanent
basis even after a change of name. In the case of major institutional transformations, a new code is assigned to the
new institution. The ETER assigns a unique identifier and annual level identifier with a year number suffix to each
institutions. If a name is changed, the identifier remains unchanged, but different institutions will be associated
with the annual level identifier. The GRID keeps the predecessor and successor institutions registered as a related/
child/parent or alias institution along with the registration of the year of transformation. The languages of the
names of HEIs also require attention as Erasmus usually uses the names in the local language. ETER has separate
variables for local names and English names, and the GRID, striving for completeness, stores the local and English
names as well as acronyms and related names.

ETER, as well as the Erasmus institutions, were geocoded precisely using Google APIs which provide reliable
location information for historical data as well. Therefore, when developing the method to identify matched
institutions, first the location information was considered followed by the names of institutions. The purely
textual-based linking method, however, was able to validate the results.

The nearby locations method considers the geographically adjacent ETER institutions to the Erasmus HEIs.
How similar the name of the nearest ETER institution is to each Erasmus HEI was examined using a fuzzy string

 

SCIENTIFIC DATA | (2020) 7:41 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0382-1 4
www.nature.com/scientificdata/

 

matching algorithm. In the case of Erasmus HEIs that are not linked to ETER institutions, the name of the sec-
ond then third nearest institutions were examined. More distant institutions were not investigated because their
geographical distance is far greater than an acceptable geocoding error. At each step, manual approval and verifi-
cation were performed to ensure the reliability of the resultant links.

Linking the GRID database. The Global Research Identifier Database (GRID) is an accurate catalogue of
institutions associated with academic research. As the GRID is freely accessible under a CCO Creative Commons
license, research-oriented universities can be identified and institutions connected to the world of linked open
data.

As institutions that are involved in the Erasmus programme are our focus, the Erasmus HEIs and the GRID
database were linked. Although HEIs in the ETER dataset were incorporated in the GRID database that was
released on 2016-04-28, the links between the ETER and the GRID were not published, so linking method had to
be applied to connect the two information sources.

The method used to identify the GRID institutions associated with Erasmus HEIs was similar that described in
the previous subsection. The GRID records contain a wealth of metadata obtained from trusted sources. Among
the metadata, the geolocation is included, so it was not necessary to geocode the GRID institutions in order to
apply the nearest location method to identify matched HEIs. Institutions in the countries participating in the
Erasmus programme have been included from the global data. Institutions were not filtered by type to avoid any
mistakes with regard to classification in GRID database. Institutions adjacent to the Erasmus HEIs were searched
for from the elements of the database thus prepared when identifying relationships.

Data Records

The linked mobility dataset is publicly available on Mendeley Data, a secure cloud-based repository, and can be
accessed directly at https://doi.org/10.17632/vnxdvh6998.3. The network data consist of one Excel file which
defines the node set with all its attributes and linked data as well as three CSV files which describe the edge set.
To supplement the data related to the nodes, POIs around the institutions and new geocodes for ETER HEIs have
been published in two file’.

The descriptions of the nodes are found in the file 3-erasmus_ HEIs.x1sx file. Microsoft Excel is capable
of handling the multilingual European names of the institutions. The worksheet erasmus_hei contains the
basic data of the nodes as provided in Table 2.

The connections worksheet in the file 3-erasmus_ HEIs.x1sx contains interfaces between other
databases as described in Table 3. Some supplementary variables, which help to provide a quick overview of the
value added, are included in this paper.

The database of categorized nearby POIs are in the file 4-uni-pois.x1sx. The database of geocoded
ETER institutions is accessible in the file.

5-eter-geocoded. xlsx. The ETER database is available at https://www.eter-project.com. This pub-
lished file contains only the original and newly geocoded data associated with the ETER IDs and the distance
between them.

The first mobility filee 6é-student_ merged. csv, is a semicolon-separated table, where each row of the
table represents a unique student mobility. The data table contains the variables shown in Table 4.

The second mobility file. 7-teacher merged.csv, is a semicolon-separated table, where each row of
the table represents a unique academic teacher mobility. The data table contains the variables shown in Table 5.

The third mobility file. 8-staff merged.csv, is a semicolon-separated table, where each rows of the
table represents a unique staff mobility. The data table contains the variables shown in Table 6.

The set of values for each variable can be found in the file 9-dictionary.x1sx. The set of values provided
by the EU Open Data Portal has been standardized in order to merge different annual data.

Technical Validation

Validation of operations on Erasmus data. The Erasmus mobility is converted into a spatial network by
geocoding the Erasmus HEIs, which is an important contribution of this work. The assignment of exact geograph-
ical locations to institutions is essential for the formation of correct inferences when using data later. The city
which provided the database of Erasmus HEIs and the headquarters of HEIs were geocoded. Geocodes of cities
were used as reference points to validate geocodes of the headquarters of HEIs. Geographical distances between
city centres and HEIs were examined and outliers had to be investigated in detail. The location data of the cities
were wrong rather than that of HEIs because the Erasmus database was incorrect, moreover, several settlements
with the same or similar names in one country are present. The geocodes of cities and HEIs were carefully cor-
rected and documented in detail in the file 5-data-validation.Rmd. Only 213 cases (4%) exist where the
geographical distance between the city centre and HEI is greater than 10 km. Several incidences are present when
the Erasmus database contains the nearest city but the university campus is situated far from the town. Even the
universities in a big city are located in the city but far from the centre.

As a functional validation, the network was presented on a map. Figure 3 shows the spatial multiplex structure
of the student mobility network based on the determined GPS coordinates where the layers are the main subject
areas of study. Some HEIs are located outside of the European continental borders, e.g. Overseas France, but these
are excluded from Fig. 3.

The unknown origins and destinations remained in the tables of edges because these are valuable additional
data for these trips. Table 7 shows the number of unknown origin and destination HEIs grouped by those type of
the travelling and the academic year.

 

SCIENTIFIC DATA | (2020) 7:41 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0382-1 5
www.nature.com/scientificdata/

 

 

The standardized form of the Erasmus HEIs. The first three characters indicate the country. Important: countries

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

erasmus_id denoted by one character contain a double space in this field.

name_local The local name of the university.

country The country in which the institution is located.

city The city in which the institution is located.

lat_city The latitudinal coordinates of the centre of the city where the headquarters of the institution is located.
lon_city The longitudinal coordinates of the centre of the city where the headquarters of the institution is located.
lat_POI The latitudinal coordinates of the headquarters of the institution.

lon_POI The longitudinal coordinates of the headquarters of the institution.

name_POI The name of the institution in the POI database.

address_POI The address of the institution in the POI database.

NUTS3 The NUTS 3 statistical region of the European Union where the headquarters of the HEI is located.

 

Erasmus_original

The boolean variable that indicates whether the institute is contained in the original database provided by the EU Open
Data Portal*’. Consolidation of the node set revealed the need to supplement the database of the institution with all HEIs
that are contained in the edge set.

 

 

 

 

ex_stud The boolean variable that indicates the activity of the institution in terms of student mobility.

ex_teach The boolean variable that indicates the activity of the institution in terms of teacher mobility.

ex_staff The boolean variable that indicates the activity of the institution in terms of staff mobility.

ex_any The boolean variable that indicates the activity of the institution during the 2008-2014 mobility programme between the

 

 

 

HEIs. Participation in a trainee programme is not considered in this study.

 

Table 2. Variables of consolidated data from Erasmus HEIs.

eee eee reer reese ere eeeseecer reese reeeeeee seers eeereeeeeeeeseeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeEeeeeeeeeeeeeeeEeeerererEeeeeeeeeEeEeeeeeeeeeereeeseresreecere

erasmus_id The standardized form of the Erasmus HEIs.

 

The GRID ID related to each Erasmus HEI. If this field is blank, no connected research institution exists in the GRID

GRID_id database.

 

The number of Erasmus HEIs connected to the GRID institutions. More than one means that the GRID institution is

countif_GRID connected to more than one Erasmus HEI probably as a result of a merger.

 

This variable was extracted from the ETER database which contains the Erasmus code and indicates the improvement of

ETER_ official _ . .
original open data (new connections, corrections).

 

ETER_geo
ETER_SPSS

To ensure the transparency of this work, connections based on adjacent locations are published.

 

To ensure the transparency of this work, connections based on textual similarities are published.

The ETER ID related to each Erasmus HEI. If this field is blank, no universities are connected in the ETER database. This
variable validated based on the ETER_ official, ETER_geo, ETER_SPSS variables.

Additional ETER ID used when the ETER_master has been changed due to the transformation of the HEI

 

ETER_master

 

ETER_master2

 

The number of Erasmus HEIs connected to the ETER universities. More than one means that the ETER institution is

countif_ETER connected to more than one Erasmus HEI probably as a result of a merger.

 

ETER_ notes

 

 

 

Some difficulties were noted concerning transformations of the HEIs or mistakes in the official database.

 

Table 3. Variables of interface data.

ey

Unknown institutions can be a source of some bias with regard to the structural properties of the network thus
their impact have examined. The highest proportion of unknown HEIs is in the academic teacher network from
2011/2012, thus, the structure of this subnetwork was investigated. The Freeman centralizations based on the hub
and authority scores are compared. For the purpose of comparability, the centralizations were normalized to the
number of nodes. One of the two compared networks is the network with unknown HEIs and the other is the
induced subgraph, without unknown nodes and their edges. The in- and out-degree distributions are investigated
but these are not a power-law, thus, gamma exponent is not comparable. The results are shown in Table 8.

Very little difference can be observed in terms of centralization due to the small in- and out-degrees of
unknown nodes. Despite the small differences between the networks with and without unknown nodes, the usage
of the induced subgraph in the case of network-science based research is recommended. Due to the completeness
of the data, the edges with unknown origins or destinations remained in the database.

The source of the Erasmus mobility database is based on the manual work of the national coordinators, there-
fore, as with any administrative database, it may contain errors. Some duplicates in the node (HEIs) set are pre-
sented, moreover, two different IDs are used for some institutions. Variables related to parameters of mobility, e.g.
duration and value of the grant, may also contain errors or be ‘NA’ The correction of the wrong or imputing the
missing data is impossible without knowing the data extracted from archived contracts of students, teachers and
members of staff. Useful and accurate imputation techniques are exist but this work is over beyond this article.
The dictionary of the mobility databases published in the EU Open Data Portal contains the sets of values for each
administrative variable.

 

SCIENTIFICDATA| (2020) 7:41 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0382-1 6
www.nature.com/scientificdata/

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

from_hei The institution of origin of the student.

to_hei The destination of the mobility.

age The age of the student in years.

gender The gender of the student.

nationality The nationality of the student.

subject The subject area of the mobility.

subject] The main subject area of the mobility.

level The level of study in the institution of origin.

yearprior Number of completed years of HE study prior to the period abroad.

duration The duration of study abroad in months.

credit The number of credits obtained whilst studying abroad.

language The language of study.

languageprep | The type of linguistic preparation.

sevsupp The total value of the grant awarded for a disability over a study period. Currency in Euros.

grant The overall subsistence expenses excluding additional funding for disabilities. Currency in Euros.

previous This field indicates whether the student has received an Erasmus grant prior to the present one.

qualification This field holds information on whether the student will graduate with a double or joint degree, or any other qualification at
the Host Institution.

year The academic year whilst studying abroad.

distance The geodesic distance between the home and host cities in km, calculated based on the geocodes of the cities.

direction ane geodesic direction from the starting point to the endpoint in degrees, which was calculated based on the geocodes of the

 

Table 4. Variables of student mobility data.

eee eee reece ec ccen

we eee eee eee cree eee eee reece e ere es eceeee eee eee ere eee reer sreecee eee esse eereeeeeeereeee eee esrereeee eres eeeeee eee eeeeeeee reece

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

from_hei The institution of origin of the teacher.

to_hei The destination of the mobility.

gender The gender of the teacher.

nationality The nationality of the teacher.

subjecthome The subject area of the teacher at the home institution.

subjecthomel | The main subject area of the teacher at the home institution.

subjecthost The subject area taught at the host institution.

subjecthost1 The main subject area taught at the host institution.

lengthdays The number of days that the teacher has been abroad excluding travel days.

lengthhours The number of hours the teacher taught abroad.

seniority The degree of experience (seniority) of the teacher.

levelteaching Level of teaching cycle at the Host Institution.

language The language subjects are taught in the Host Country.

sevsupp The total value of the grant awarded for a disability during a visit by a teacher. Currency in Euros.

subsistence The overall subsistence expenses excluding additional funding for disabilities. Currency in Euros.

travel The overall travel expenses excluding additional funding for disabilities. Currency in Euros.

isfirst This field indicates whether this is the first teaching assignment mobility funded by Erasmus for the academic member of
staff.

year The academic year of teaching abroad.

distance Geodesic distance between the home and host cities in km, calculated based on the geocodes of the cities.

direction Geodesic direction from the starting point to the endpoint in degrees, calculated based on the geocodes of the cities.

 

Table 5. Variables of academic teacher mobility data.

 

 

Cee eee eres reece e sees eerereeses seers eeeeeeeeeseeeeeeseeeeeereeeeseeeeeeeeeeeseeseeeeeeeseeeeeereeeseeeeereeeEreeeseseereseseereeerereseeereseses

Validation of ETER geocodes. 3,043 institutions with unique identifiers are registered on the ETER data-
base. During the validation, the geographical distances between the geocodes in the ETER database and the
geocodes obtained by the API were examined. For extremely long distances (greater than 10 km), both geocodes
of institutions were mapped to verify which data is correct.

In the ETER database no geocordinates are presented for 164 institutions, so new geocordinates were defined
for them. The matching of the POI names returned by the API with the names of institutions was verified. When
just initials of institutions were available, the validation was performed manually.

 

SCIENTIFICDATA| (2020) 7:41 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0382-1 7
www.nature.com/scientificdata/

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

from_hei The institution of origin of the member of staff.

to_hei The destination of the mobility.

gender The gender of the member of staff.

nationality The nationality of the member of staff.

workcat The category of work at the home university.

seniority The degree of experience (seniority) of the member of staff.

activity The type of activity conducted by the member of staff at the host institution.

lengthdays The number of days that the member of staff was abroad excluding travel days.

language The language of study in the Host Country.

sevsupp The total value of the grant awarded for a disability during a staff visit. Currency in Euros.

 

subsistence _| The overall subsistence expenses excluding additional funding for disabilities. Currency in Euros.

 

 

 

 

 

travel The overall travel costs excluding additional funding for disabilities. Currency in Euros.

isfirst This field indicates whether this is the first staff training assignment mobility funded by Erasmus for the member of staff.
year The academic year of training abroad.

distance The geodesic distance between the home and host cities in km, calculated based on the geocodes of the city.

direction The geodesic direction from the starting point to the endpoint in degrees, calculated based on the geocodes of the city.

 

 

 

 

Table 6. Variables of staff member mobility data.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2008/2009 16 28 2
2009/2010 80 31 | 8
2010/2011 | 421 1099 106 157 33 62
2011/2012 | 383 626 225 217 51 85
2012/2013 | 34 547 22 118 | 19 38
2013/2014 |

 

Table 7. The number of unknown HEIs in edge lists.

eee eee reer eres eee reese eee e ere es eecesreeee seers eeeer sees eeecee seers seeeee eee eee eeereeeeeeeeeerer eres eeeeeeeeeeeereeeeEeeeerereeeeeereeerceeeeeee

The inaccuracy of the geocodes in the ETER database is illustrated by the fact that only 172 of the 2,879 insti-
tutions posses the two types of geocode data within 50 metres and only 1,275 cases are present within 1 km. In 102
cases, the distance is greater than 100 km, which were manually verified. The institutions that are incorrectly geoc-
oded by the API are well documented in Subsection 3.3 of the file 6-data-validation.Rmd. The resultant
validated database of geocoded ETER institutions is accessible to the public as a result of this work.

Validation of the linked ETER database. The connections between the Erasmus and ETER databases
were validated by a method that is independent of the utilised location-based merging of the databases. Links
between the Erasmus and ETER IDs were validated by a textual similarity-based method using SPSS Modeler
Entity Analytics (SPSS-EA) and taking into account the name of the organization as well as its location (city) and
country. Several open-source alternatives to SPSS-EA are available, which are implemented in R’*) or Python”.
However, the accuracy of these open-source alternatives is less than that of the SPSS-EA”*.

SPSS-EA loaded both Erasmus and ETER datasets into a repository as two source tags. For all the names,
locations (cities) and countries ot the organizations, features such as frequency, exclusivity and stability can be
specified. After features have been set and datasets exported into the repository, the EA matches records of two
source tags and produces an output table.

It should be noted that textual similarity-based methods are blind to institutional transformations and
changes, when the name of a new HEI is changed. However, they are well suited to compare current data because
the related country and city information filters out the names of the institutions that need to be compared.

Before using EA, the name of organizations was preprocessed. The official names of organizations are used
in both databases. Accented letters were exchanged for ANSI characters (e.g. 4 > a, O > 0) and all characters
capitalized.

The frequency indicates how many identities can have the same value. Typically the frequency is specified to
be ‘One’ for IDs, however, some times the same HEIs possessed different ETER or Erasmus IDs, therefore, in this
case the frequency was set as ‘Few’ for all IDs. Since only one or a few HEIs are located in a city, the frequency of
the feature of cities was set as ‘Few, while the frequency of the feature of countries was set as ‘Many.

The exclusivity indicates that an entity should typically have only one of this type of feature. For all attributes
this feature was set as “Yes.

 

SCIENTIFICDATA| (2020) 7:41 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0382-1 8
www.nature.com/scientificdata/

 

(a) Humanities and Arts (b) Engineering, Manu- (c) Agriculture and Vet-
facturing and Construc-_ erinary
tion
Fig. 3. Mobility networks with different subject dimensions in the 2011-2012 academic year. The size and

colour intensity of the nodes are proportional to the number of incoming students. The size and colour intensity
of the edges are proportional to the number of students that travel between the connected HEIs.

eee eee reer errr e cere reese cerereeseeererereeeesresreeeeeeeesreeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeereeeeeeeeeeeeeerereeeeeeeeeeEeEeeesesrerEeeeeerercesrereseseresreeee

With unknown nodes 0.96383 0.97211
Without unknown nodes_ | 0.96415 0.97243

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 8. Changes in centralization.

Cece reer eee eee seers eee eeeeesseeeeeeeeeeseeeeeseeeeseseeeeeeeeseeeeeeseeseeeeeeeeeseeeeseeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeseeeeeseeeeseeeeeeereesereeeseeeees

The stability indicates the value of this feature (that is, whether it is unlikely to change during the life-time of
an entity). In this case, only the country can be considered as a stable attribute. All the IDs, organization names
and locations can change over time.

Although the ETER dataset contained the Erasmus IDs of the HEIs, the EA identified 68 additional matches.
The SPSS-EA-based joint table also showed that in three cases the related ETER IDs were wrongly specified in the
Erasmus dataset. In addition, the EA also revealed that an institution could be represented by different Erasmus
IDs and ETER IDs. Following a change in ownership of HEIs, in four cases the ETER ID changed as well but the
Erasmus ID remained unchanged.

The summarized results of the location-based merging method and its validation can be found in the con-
nection worksheet of the file 3-erasmus HEIs. x1sx. In order to ensure the transparency of this work,
the Erasmus link originally included in the ETER database, moreover, the results of the location-based merging
method and the textual linking method using SPSS-EA were included in the connection worksheet. In order
to summarize the results, an ‘ETER_master’ variable was introduced. In the case of several Erasmus HEIs, the
three types of related ETER institutions were different, thus, manual verification was required. Most of the differ-
ences were due to the transformation and merger of institutions. In the case of institutions where this procedure
could not be maintained, a note is also provided in the variable ‘ETER_notes.

Originally the ETER database included 2,251 Erasmus connections. In 25 cases, the official Erasmus link in
the ETER database was found to be incorrect and 2,226 were confirmed. We uncovered an additional 262 connec-
tions using the location-based algorithm and textual similarity-based verification. We identified 194 additional
links based on their locations: 3 by applying SPSS-EA, and 65 by simultaneously applying these approaches.
Among the 2,483 links, we confirmed 2,235 based on their location and textual similarity. We validated the incor-
rect and additional connections manually by searching for the website and address of the institution concerned as
well as matching its data in the ETER and Erasmus databases.

Validation of linking GRID database. We validated the GRID-Erasmus connections by SPSS-EA based
on their textual similarity. In terms of the Erasmus programme, the Erasmus name, city and country were con-
sidered during the application process, moreover, the local and English names from the ETER dataset were also
taken into account. In terms of the GRID, the GRID name, city and country were considered along with aliases
e.g. former names of institutions, and labels, e.g. local names of institutions in local languages. The process did not
provide a conclusive link between the two databases so manual matching was also required to be comprehensive.
The result of the location-based linking method with textual similarity-based validation was an interface
which expresses that an Erasmus HEI is also a research institution. The interface contains 2,219 links of which 77
are institutions that participate in the Erasmus programme but are not in the ETER database. The linking method
and validation failed to yield any results for 364 HEIs that are active in the Erasmus programme and included in
the ETER database presumably because, they did not exceed the threshold required to enter the GRID database.

 

SCIENTIFICDATA| (2020) 7:41 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0382-1 9
www.nature.com/scientificdata/

 

Code availability
The following R and Python codes used to process the cleaning and datasets can be accessed along with their data
without any restrictions.

The 1-erasmus edgelist merge clean.Rmd shows how datasets were cleaned and standardized.
The file can be read using the freely available computer program RStudio and contains R codes of data wrangling
in the form of chunks and comments about the processing steps all the way from the open datasets to the merged
and cleaned data.

The program 2-findplacefromtext . py helped to harvest the geocodes of the HEIs from the POI data-
base. HEIs were also recorded as POIs in the database, so their names, addresses and coordinates could be col-
lected. The power of the database was proven by the historical institutional data.

The geographically nearest POIs, e.g. pubs and museums, to the HEIs were identified by the programme
3-POI Here neighbour.py.

Based on the geocoordinates of the HEIs, the nearest ETER and GRID institutions that included university
type institutes were matched using files 4-merge eter DB.Rmdand5-merge grid _DB.Rmd, respec-
tively. The aim was to identify matching Erasmus and ETER as well as GRID institutions.

The validation determined using R are shown in the file 6-data_validation. Rmd. All the calculations
made according to the published database can be seen in the Rmd file.

The Gephi software, which is popular among network scientists, can also read the data. The Network on
map subsection in the file 6-data_validation.Rmd includes the data preparation steps to read three sub-
ject layers, moreover, maps in Fig. 3 are provided with the help of the file 7-network on _map.gephi.

Received: 26 March 2019; Accepted: 17 January 2020;
Published online: 06 February 2020

References
1. Souto-Otero, M., Huisman, J., Beerkens, M., de Wit, H. & Vuji¢, S. Barriers to international student mobility: Evidence from the
Erasmus Program. Educ. Res. 42(2), 70-77 (2013).
2. Lesjak, M., Juvan, E., Ineson, E. M., Yap, M. H. T. & PodovSovnik Axelsson, E. Erasmus student motivation: Why and where to go?
High. Educ. 70(5), 845-865 (2015).
3. Orr, D., Schnitzer, K. & Frackmann, E. Social and Economic Conditions of Student Life in Europe Eurostudent III. 2005-2008. final
report, Bertelsmann (2008).
4. Rodriguez Gonzalez, C., Bustillo Mesanza, R. & Mariel, P. The determinants of international student mobility flows: an empirical
study on the Erasmus programme. High. Educ. 62(4), 413-430 (2011).
5. Maggioni, M. A. & Uberti, T. E. Knowledge networks across Europe: which distance matters? The Annals of Reg. Sci. 43(3), 691-720
(2009).
6. Barrioluengo, M. S. & Flisi, S. Student mobility in tertiary education: institutional factors and regional attractiveness. No. JRC108895.
Joint Research Centre (Seville site) (2017).
7. Rodriguez, X. A., Martinez-Roget, E & Pawlowska, E. Academic tourism demand in Galicia, Spain. Tour. Manag. 33(6), 1583-1590
(2012).
8. Savic, M. et al. Analysis of Erasmus staff and student mobility network within a big European project. In 40th International
Convention on Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO), 613-618. IEEE (2017).
9. Breznik, K. & Gologranc, G. Erasmus mobility on the institutional level. In International Conference “Management, Knowledge and
Learning”, Portoroz, Slovenia 1361-1366 (2014).
10. Derzsi, A., Derzsy, N., Kaptalan, E. & Néda, Z. Topology of the Erasmus student mobility network. Physica A 390(13), 2601-2610
(2011).
11. Communiqué of the Conference of European Ministers Responsible for Higher Education. The European Higher Education Area
- achieving the goals. (19-20 May 2005).
12. European Commission/EACEA/Eurydice. The European Higher Education Area in 2018: Bologna Process Implementation Report.
Publications Office of the European Union (2018).
13. Gadar, L., Kosztyan, Z. T. & Abonyi, J. The settlement structure is reflected in personal investments: Distance-dependent network
modularitybased measurement of regional attractiveness. Complexity, 1-16 (2018).
14. Boccaletti, S. et al. The structure and dynamics of multilayer networks. Phys. Rep. 544(1), 1-122 (2014).
15. Chen, J., Hsu, W., Lee, M. L. & Ng, S. K. Labeling network motifs in protein interactomes for protein function prediction. In 2007
IEEE 23rd International Conference on Data Engineering, 546-555 (2007).
16. Palla, G., Derényi, I., Farkas, I. & Vicsek, T. Uncovering the overlapping community structure of complex networks in nature and
society. Nature 435(7043), 814-818 (2005).
17. He, C. et al. A multi-view clustering method for community discovery integrating links and tags. In 14th International Conference
on e-Business Engineering (ICEBE), IEEE, 2017, 23-30 (2018).
18. Park, J. & Barabasi, A. L. Distribution of node characteristics in complex networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
104(46), 17916-17920 (2007).
19. Gadar, L. & Abonyi, J. Frequent pattern mining in multidimensional organizational networks. Sci Rep. 9, 3322 (2019).
20. Barthélemy, M. Spatial networks. Phys. Rep. 499(1-3), 1-101 (2011).
21. Erasmus mobility statistics 2008-09. EU Open Data Portal. http://data.europa.eu/euodp/en/data/dataset/erasmus-mobility-
statistics-2008-09 (2016).
22. Erasmus mobility statistics 2009-10. EU Open Data Portal. http://data.europa.eu/euodp/en/data/dataset/erasmus-facts-figures-
trends-2009-2010 (2015).
23. Erasmus mobility statistics 2010-11. EU Open Data Portal. http://data.europa.eu/euodp/en/data/dataset/erasmus-facts-figures-
trends-2010-2011 (2015).
24. Erasmus mobility statistics 2011-12. EU Open Data Portal. http://data.europa.eu/euodp/en/data/dataset/erasmus-mobility-
statistics-2011-12 (2015).
25. Erasmus mobility statistics 2012-13. EU Open Data Portal. http://data.europa.eu/euodp/en/data/dataset/erasmus-mobility-
statistics-2012-13 (2015).
26. Erasmus mobility statistics 2013-14. EU Open Data Portal. http://data.europa.eu/euodp/en/data/dataset/erasmus-mobility-
statistics-2013-14 (2016).
27. Gadar, L., Kosztyan, Z. T., Telcs, A. & Abonyi, J. A multilayer and spatial description of the Erasmus mobility network. Mendeley
Data. https://doi.org/10.17632/vnxdvh6998.3 (2019).

 

SCIENTIFICDATA| (2020) 7:41 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0382-1 10
www.nature.com/scientificdata/

 

28. Robinson, D. fuzzyjoin: Join Tables Together on Inexact Matching. R package version 0.1.4, https://CRAN.R-project.org/
package=fuzzyjoin (2019).

29. Kenedy, C. fuzzyjoin: Join two tables by a fuzzy comparison of text columns. Python package version 0.5.2, https://pypi.org/project/
fuzzyjoin/ (2019).

30. Dhurandhar, A., Ravi, R., Graves, B., Maniachari, G. & Ettl, M. Robust system for identifying procurement fraud. Twenty-Seventh
IAAI Conference (2015).

31. European Commission Directorate-General for Education and Culture. The Erasmus programme 2008/2009 a statistical overview,
https://data.europa.eu/euodp/repository/ec/dg-eac/erasmusdata-2008-2009/Erasmus_statistical_report_2008-09.pdf (2019).

32. European Commission Directorate-General for Education and Culture. Erasmus - facts, figures & trends the European Union
support for student and staff exchanges and university cooperation in 2009/2010, http://www.cimo.fi/instancedata/prime_product_
julkaisu/cimo/embeds/cimowwwstructure/25199_FactsandFigures20092010.pdf (2019).

33. European Commission Directorate-General for Education and Culture. Erasmus - facts, figures & trends the European Union
support for student and staff exchanges and university cooperation in 2010/2011, http://www.cimo.fi/instancedata/prime_product_
julkaisu/cimo/embeds/cimowwwstructure/25198_Erasmus-Facts_figures_trends2010-11.pdf (2019).

34. European Commission Directorate-General for Education and Culture. Erasmus - facts, figures & trends the European Union
support for student and staff exchanges and university cooperation in 2011/2012, https://issuu.com/iservice-europa/docs/fact_and_
figures-en_131025-web (2019).

35. European Commission Directorate-General for Education and Culture. Erasmus - facts, figures & trends the European Union
support for student and staff exchanges and university cooperation in 2012/2013, http://www.agence-erasmus.fr/docs/2234_facts-
figures_en.pdf (2019).

36. European Commission Directorate-General for Education and Culture. Erasmus — facts, figures & trends the European Union
support for student and staff exchanges and university cooperation in 2013/2014, http://ec.europa.eu/assets/eac/education/library/
statistics/erasmus-plus-facts-figures_en.pdf (2019).

37. List of all institutions participating in the programme for the academic year 2013-2014. EU Open Data Portal. http://data.europa.
eu/euodp/en/data/dataset/erasmus-mobility-statistics-2013-14/resource/9ad29b2b-d63f-4660-ba21-772925d57362 (2018).

Acknowledgements

The publication has been supported by the Hungarian Government through the Thematic Excellence Program.
Part of the research was supported by the European Union and co-financed by the European Social Fund through
the project EFOP-3.6.2-16-2017-00017 entitled “Sustainable, intelligent and inclusive regional and city models”.
We thank inspirations from our partner in “Analysis of Scientific Performance of Universities” - bilateral mobility
project of HAS - FWO 2018-19. We thank the anonymous referees for their useful suggestions. The ETER dataset
was provided by the European Tertiary Education Register (ETER) funded by the European Commission under
the contracts EAC-2013-0308, EAC-2015-0280 and 934533-2017 A08-CH.

Author contributions

L.G. acquired the ETER and GRID open datasets, assisted in the research design, performed all data cleaning and
drafted the manuscript. Zs.T.K. developed the algorithm which validated the matching of Erasmus institutes to
ETER as well as GRID datasets, led the research design and drafted the manuscript. A.T. led the research design of
data validation and demonstration and drafted as well as reviewed the manuscript. J.A. acquired the open datasets
of Erasmus nodes and edges, developed the algorithm to geocode the Erasmus and ETER institutions, specified
POIs adjacent to institutions, moreover, supervised, conceptualized, reviewed and edited the manuscript.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.A.

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International

License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/
applies to the metadata files associated with this article.

© The Author(s) 2020

 

SCIENTIFICDATA| (2020) 7:41 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0382-1 11
