Building and Environment 186 (2020) 107356

 

     

oe e a Y x

Ze.

ELSEVIER

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect ae Tle
Environment

Building and Environment

journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/buildenv

 

Check for

“Working in the dark?” investigation of physiological and psychological updates
indices and prediction of back-lit screen users’ reactions to light dimming

Michael Papinutto®”, Julien Nembrini*, Denis Lalanne *

* Human-IST Institute, Department of Computer Science, University of Fribourg, Switzerland
> Eye and Brain Mapping Laboratory, Department of Psychology, University of Fribourg, Switzerland

 

ARTICLE INFO

 

Keywords:

Visual comfort
Light satisfaction
Screen luminance
Light dimming
Light

Perception
Reaction prediction

ABSTRACT

 

The advent of back-lit screens in contemporary offices has profoundly impacted the field of visual comfort.
Screen users typically fail to adapt to changing environments and often require an individual light quality. To this
end, the new approach of human-building interaction in computer science would consider the context of oc-
cupants interacting with lights. Within this framework, the proposed study complements existing studies on
reactions to light dimming with a more tightly controlled environment and the task difficulty adapted individ-
ually. To evaluate the impact of back-lit screens on participants reaction to light dimming, two sets of partici-
pants were assigned either to adaptive or fixed screen back-light. All participants undergo three different
naturalistic light dimming speeds typically happening at sunset (0.5—2 lux/s). This study uncovers the potential
for physiological measurements to indicate visual discomfort and participants’ proclivity to react as a function of
personal psychological traits. Importantly, results reveal two behaviour categories: reactive and non-reactive,
which are related to participant-specific psychological traits and perceptions. Regardless of the group, eye
movements convey early indication of discomfort: participants’ reactions happen below standard light levels
(300 lux) while fixation number shift state above. Together, eye-movements features and visual comfort ques-
tionnaires recordings during the initial steady light period predict ramp behaviour category. Physiological and
psychological measurements thus appear as candidates for adaptive light control according to idiosyncratic

characteristics, displaying opportunities for increased acceptance of energy-efficient automation strategies.

 

1. Introduction

Increasing their level of well-being, health, and comfort has been a
constant concern for human beings. Throughout the 20th century, ar-
chitects and builders have improved indoor comfort by developing re-
sources to adapt environmental conditions in buildings such as HVAC,
electric lighting and other systems. Despite the standardisation efforts to
guarantee and optimise comfort in modern buildings, complaints are
still raised by occupants [8]. Since the average fraction of time spent
indoor reaches 90% [21], such complaints become more and more
relevant and need to be addressed not solely to reach an average satis-
faction, but preferably for the satisfaction of each occupant individually.
However, it remains to be clarified to what extent occupants’ dissatis-
faction is due to unmet conditions of indoor environments or subjective
characteristics.

Vision being the most developed and primary sense of human beings,
the visual dimension of comfort is of particular interest. It encompasses

topics such as the amount of light (Ze., illuminance measured in lux), or
the sight a window offers. Visual comfort is best defined as the absence
of visual discomfort: visual comfort is achieved when light intensity is
nor too bright, nor too dark, or when characteristics of the visual envi-
ronments do not interfere with proper vision and occupants current
activities [21]. Visual comfort depends on the physiology of the human
eye, the physical quantities describing the amount of light as well as its
distribution in space and on the spectral emission of the light source.
Accordingly, visual comfort has been evaluated in existing methodolo-
gies through the assessment of the amount of light, light’s uniformity, its
quality in rendering colours and the prediction of the risk of glare for
occupants [10]. In this study, we will focus on the former assessment of
the amount of light while ensuring no discomfort glare. While these are
objective physical measurements of light (or have evolved towards it in
the case of glare), the present study sets out to encompass physiological
and psychological assessments of visual comfort through eye-tracking
metrics and self reported visual comfort [36]. In the past years, visual

* Corresponding author. Human-IST Institute, Department of Computer Science, University of Fribourg, Switzerland

E-mail address: michael.papinutto@unifr.ch (M. Papinutto).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2020.107356

Received 20 July 2020; Received in revised form 27 September 2020; Accepted 30 September 2020

Available online 9 October 2020
0360-1323/© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nce-nd/4.0/).

This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
M. Papinutto et al.

comfort has been profoundly changed by scientific and technological
breakthroughs, such as non-visual effects of light and the advent of
LEDs. Standards have been proposed and adopted by several organisa-
tions [11,14,15,27], to guarantee an optimal level of visual comfort for
the majority of occupants. Visual comfort has been shown to have a wide
range of impacts on physiological and psychological aspects. For
instance, good lighting can enhance productivity, focus, alertness [37],
visual acuity [7] and mood [29]. On the contrary, poor lighting condi-
tions may induce from mood downturns to depressive disorders [4] and
could also be held responsible for performance decrease [18].

In the last 20 years, a particular source of light has appeared, namely
back-lit screens. Accompanying the advent of mobile computing, back-
lighting pervaded occupants’ visual environments, with offices’ moni-
tors, laptops, smartphones and tablets and considerably changed visual
comfort habits. Indeed, back-lighting provides a sufficient amount of
light from devices without requiring external light supply [12]. How-
ever, the discrepancy between the amount of light coming from such
screens and the one originating from background lighting induces
discomfort and eyes fatigue [40]. Back-lit screens have been shown to
impact cognitive performance [9], while exposure to the blue light
emitted was shown to change physiological body rhythms [6] by mis-
ruling circadian rhythms that impact sleep, mood and other psycho-
logical aspects [5,43]. Despite their current omnipresence, there have
not been enough studies involving back-lit screens in their standard
usage context in conjunction with standard luminaires to draw robust
conclusions on the visual comfort required with such devices.

The impact of digital technologies on visual comfort and habits
reaches beyond the advent of back-lit screens. User interfaces mediating
the interactions between occupants and buildings are installed to control
lighting conditions, such as presence sensors, daylight sensors, or
reflective blinds with often as the primary goal the saving of electrical
energy. However, many such systems are examples of technology
rejection. For instance, motion-sensors activating electrical lighting end
up covered up to avoid lights switching on at inappropriate times, or
switching off when visual acuity is required [17]. Compromising be-
tween automation and user rejection may even result in a worse energy
balance in the end, as the impact of occupants’ behaviour on building
energy performance remains largely overlooked or over-simplified [25].
A field called Human Building Interaction (HBI) [2,3] has recently
applied the methodologies of human-computer interaction and
user-centred design to the specific context of users within buildings
interacting with digital devices. In addition to visual comfort and
energy-saving, an HBI approach to lighting would consider the context
of occupants interacting with lights. By focusing on individual behav-
iour, it bears the potential to increase each occupant’s visual comfort
according to her or his own characteristics and needs. The present study
aims at approaching visual comfort with an HBI perspective in interplay
with quantitative research methods of psychological science to provide a
better understanding of factors underlying occupants’ behaviour. This
approach allows shedding light on some of the questions (Questions 3, 4,
7 and 8) raised by Hong, Yan, D’Oca and Chen [25].

Interactions with the visual environment and their impacts are
highly subjective and vary from one occupant to another [8]. This is true
likewise for reactions to changing light conditions. An interesting
experimental setup to explore such reactions is light dimming, in which
light intensity is gradually lowered, in an analogy to changing sunset
light. Using this setup, Fridell [20] found that her participants preferred
a low amount of light and therefore reacted late to light dimming.

Similarly, Begemann et al. [5] uncovered two different profiles: one
requiring a high amount of light and another preferring a low amount of
light, calling these distinct groups “Mr Bright” and “Mr Dim Light’. The
existence of such profiles unlocks the potential to take into account
occupants’ individual needs and therefore saving energy according to
those requirements, while preserving each occupant’s visual comfort. To
this end, a comprehensive understanding of the underlying character-
istics of these profiles is needed. However, despite the substantial

Building and Environment 186 (2020) 107356

amount of research on visual comfort, and because most studies did not
specifically target such questions, it remains unclear whether these
variations in reactions are due to subjective characteristics or discrep-
ancies in the comfort of the visual environment. This is, indeed, the
reason why further research investigating personal light preferences
resulting from the reaction to light dimming is proposed in the current
study.

To evaluate occupants’ reactions to light dimming, the accepted
methodology consists in a constant gradual decrease in light over time,
with the evaluation of reaction at specifics speeds in lux per seconds,
subsequently called ramps. Studies using ramps evaluate reaction from
two perspectives: detectability and acceptability. The former aims at
investigating the rationales underpinning the detection of a light
decrease, while the latter explores the factors influencing the acceptance
of a specific amount of light. The typical approach to investigate
acceptability involves subjecting participants to ramping conditions
until a reaction occurs. Following Newsham et al. [33] and concen-
trating on dimming acceptability, results of previous studies are pre-
sented in a unified manner using the percentage of deviation from the
initial illuminance level since experimental conditions differ in initial
level, ramp and tasks.’ For example, let an initial illuminance level be
500 lux, a reaction from a participant occurring at 300 lux will be pre-
sented as an accepted dimming of 40% (i.e., -40%). The study of Akashi
et al. [1] revealed that participants accepted —20% change from the
initial light level, and no effects of ramps nor task (free gaze vs paper-
work) were found. In their study, Tenner, Begemann and van den Beld
[41] found an effect of the initial illuminance level: letting their par-
ticipants choose an initial level between 830, 1660, and 3100 lux
resulted in participants accepting —30, —40 or —60% (i.e., 581, 996, or
1240 lux) respectively [41]. In other studies, participants accepted
—50% with high inter-individual variability [32], or participants were
satisfied with a dimming of —40% [33]. Altogether, these studies reveal
that an average of about 40% of dimming is acceptable (e.g. from 500 to
300 lux corresponding to the range of recommended values [11,14,27]).

While altogether these studies shed light on the impact of ramps and
the amount of acceptable light dimming, it remains to be understood
whether reactions to light dimming are wired to the amount of light or to
ramps and what factors trigger the reaction. Indeed, despite unnatural
ranges used in ramps, occupants mostly reacted at the same level of light
no matter the ramp. Existing studies used various dimming ramps from
natural to unnatural ones ranging from a decrease of 0.5—337 lux/s. For
reference, in Central Europe, natural sunset ramps range from 1 lux/s
(winter overcast sky) to 5 lux/s (summer clear sky) [35].° Moreover, the
use of ramps was guided by either the goal of energy savings or visual
comfort. However, the use of unnatural ramps has no practical impli-
cations for handling idiosyncratic behavioural reactions to address these
goals. Additionally, some of these studies did not control for the influ-
ence of daylight, mixing daylight conjointly with electric lighting, pre-
venting conclusive interpretations of the results as the impact of
electrical light and daylight cannot be disentangled.

Regarding acceptability, even if it is shown to be highly subjective, it
was not found to be dependent of the task performed: the same amount
of dimming was accepted while participants performed free gaze, paper
works or computer works. However, this lack of effect might arise from
the absence of task difficulty control according to each individual. Tasks
used in these studies may have elicited different performances across
individuals, inducing different reaction to light dimming, and thus
potentially shading effects of task or ramps. Controlling for task diffi-
culty bears the potential to increase sensibility to evaluate such effects.

Last but not least, these studies did not measure socio-demographic

' The following percentage results were for the majority estimated by
Ref. [33] or resulted from our estimations.

2 Our own calculations based on sunset time in Europe and in Switzerland
provided the same results.
M. Papinutto et al.

and psychological aspects influencing the inherent capabilities of oc-
cupants to take action on their visual environment. Indeed, psycholog-
ical traits have been shown to impact the proclivity to take action or
complain [24], potentially influencing reaction to changing visual
conditions. From a bodily perspective, physiological indices were also
not monitored in previous studies investigating light ramps, whereas
they could be meaningful indices to evaluate lighting impacts on occu-
pants and their visual comfort. Such physiological impacts of light may
trigger anticipated body reactions before occupants complain or take
action on lighting, thus offering fruitful possibilities for HBI and smart
building controls.

All the above arguments converge to support the affirmation that
actual results on ramps remain inconclusive and might be explained by
confounding variables, different goals in evaluating reactions to ramps
and the variability of settings used. This finding calls for a more tightly
controlled experimental setup to confirm or infirm ramp or task effects.
The present study thus proposes to fill previous studies’ gaps by
manipulating natural ramps, controlling for individual task difficulty
and by evaluating the impact of screen back-lighting. To the best of our
knowledge, back-lit screens were never studied in the context of light
dimming, although taking into account both natural ramps and back-
lighting is crucial to draw ecologically valid conclusions. Additionally,
psychological traits’ are assessed using a validated psychological
assessment of personality that is often overlooked in comfort studies and
was — as far as we are aware of — never used in the context of visual
comfort. Such psychological traits assessment bears the potential to
untangle the subjectivity of visual comfort preferences, opening the way
for including it in personalised light control systems to increase each
occupants’ visual comfort and well-being individually. Also not studied
in the light dimming context, several physiological markers are collected
with the aim to anticipate and predict reactions to light dimming.

The general goal of this encompassing experimental setup is to drive
visual comfort research beyond a global average satisfaction goal towards
idiosyncratically comfortable environments. More particularly, our
goals are to evaluate differences in reaction to light using three different
natural ramps (the ramp condition with three modalities: 0.5, 1 or 2 lux/
s) as well as to manipulate the ability of the screen to adapt its luminance
to environment lighting or not (the screen condition with two modalities:
fixed or adaptive). Moreover, we evaluate socio-demographic and psy-
chological traits to untangle their impact on the proclivity of partici-
pants to react to light ramps. Finally, this study also aims at defining the
potential of physiological markers to intervene before the action un-
dertook by participants to change lighting and to predict participants
reaction to light dimming. Altogether, we aim to provide insights into
occupant behaviour as a function of different ramps and conditions, and
using new physiological and psychological traits metrics that are good
candidates to feed building automation processes. In summary, the main
contributions of this study are the following:

e Participants’ reactions to environmentally realistic ramps are
assessed in a tightly controlled setup, involving manipulations rele-
vant to occupants in buildings, and including a back-lit device,
representative of the most prevalent type of working devices in office
buildings (see section 2).

e The impact of back-lighting on occupants’ behaviour with lights is
evaluated, showing that participants exposed to back-lighting tend to
choose light levels that are lower to the norms (see section 3.2).

e The impact of psychological traits on the participants’ reaction
proclivity is evaluated (see section 3.3) using a validated personality
scale commonly used in psychological assessment, namely the NEO-
PI-R [16] (see section 2.2).

e The potential of physiological indices to provide an early indication
of discomfort is investigated (see section 3.4). A novel method called
Matrix Profile [45] is used to efficiently identify shifts in physio-
logical data (see section 2.5).

Building and Environment 186 (2020) 107356

e Psychological and physiological markers are demonstrated to be
good predictors of participants’ behaviour (see section 3.5).

2. Methods
2.1. Participants

Forty participants — 34 females — aged from 18 to 39 years old (M
= 21.38, SD = 3.29) took part in this experiment. All participants had a
normal or corrected vision, gave informed consent and were psychology
students at the University of Fribourg, Switzerland. The protocol of this
study was approved by the ethical committee of the Department of
Psychology of Fribourg University, Switzerland.

2.2. Materials

The NEO PI-R [16] scales for extroversion and openness were used to
assess personality traits that can affect the decision to act on lighting
conditions. Each scale consisted of 48 questions, with a total of 96
questions. All sub-scales of both scales were used.

The visual and thermal perception of participants were assessed
through custom questionnaires based on Likert scales [30] inspired by
Chinazzo and Wienold [13]. Both questionnaires were designed such
that the same relevance and importance to visual and thermal comfort
were given to hide the real focus of this study. These questionnaires
evaluate sensation, comfort, preference, judgement and change
requested for both thermal and visual comfort (see Table A in
Appendix).

A Moving Target Fractions (MTF) [26] was implemented in Python
using PsychoPy an opensource application [19,34] and consisted of 14
bubbles containing fractions from § to ? travelling from left to right. The
goal of this task was to indicate which ones of the moving fractions were
smaller than 4 by clicking on it, which had the effect of changing the
fraction’s background colour to green (without meaning of success) on
the display. Fraction could be marked or unmarked while they were
present on the screen. To control for the difficulty of this task, we
manipulated the fractions’ travel speed, determined by a QUEST pro-
cedure [44] performed during training. The QUEST procedure consists
of a speed adaption at each trial at the most probable Bayesian estimate
of the threshold required for the participants to reach 80% accuracy at
the MTF. All fractions were displayed and moved on a 1920 x 1200
pixels grey background with a square indicating the score displayed on a
2016 Mac Book Pro 15’ (see Fig. 1).

 

Fig. 1. Screenshot of the Moving Target Fractions task (MTF). Fractions travel
from left to right. In this capture, the participant evaluated and marked the
green fraction as being higher than one third. (For interpretation of the refer-
ences to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of
this article.)
M. Papinutto et al.

2.3. Apparatus

2.3.1. Wearable

The Empatica E4 wristband [22] measured the Blood volume pulse
(BVP), recorded at 64 Hz, the Inter-beat intervals (IBI), with corre-
sponding time-stamps, the Wrist skin temperature (T) and conductivity
(SC), both recorded at 4 Hz. To ensure that the wristband reaches skin
temperature before the beginning of the experiment, it was attached to
the left wrist 10 min before the beginning of the experiment.

Eye movements were recorded with the SMI eye-tracking glasses 2.0
(ETG). We calibrated the eye-tracking glasses at the beginning of the
experiment using a three-point fixation procedure as implemented in the
SMI API (see the SMI Manual).

2.3.2. Lighting

The lighting used in this experiment were two directional LED panels
which were in the ceiling, above each side of a table (see Fig. 2), for
more details see Ref. [31]. The illuminance ranged from 0 lux to 680 lux
on the workplace. The lenses were tilted, and the intensity was initially
set to 550 lux at the workplace as recommended by standards on
working place [11,14]. We also ensured that the settings produced no
discomfort glare nor reflection on the screen. To do this, we followed
rules of thumbs by setting the device just below the lights (see Fig. 2) and
ensuring visually that no discomfort glare occurred no matter the posi-
tion of the participants. The rationale behind this approach is that glare
measures are inadequate to assess LEDs-produced glare [39]. During the
experiment, the light was dimmed directly through KNX bus commands
whereas light directions were kept unchanged. The lights dimming
commands could also be directly controlled from the computer with a
slider from 0 to 100 (as a linear percentage of the maximum light

Building and Environment 186 (2020) 107356

intensity of 550 lux) which was part of the questionnaire appearing
when participants took breaks.

Ramps were chosen according to sunset light decrease with cloudy or
clear sky in Fribourg, Switzerland. Measurements indicated a median
lux/s decrease of 2.38 (95% CI = [0.20, 15.92]). The highest values were
observed during the brightest days, whereas overcast or shaded blue
skies deliver a minimal of 0.18 lux/s and a maximum of 2.98 lux/s.
Hence ramps condition were chosen accordingly with a decrease of
either 0.5, 1 or 2 lux/s. Conjointly with the adaptive screen luminance, it
resulted in an illuminance to screen luminance ratio on average of 10.34
(SD = 8.23) for the fast ramp, 8.04 (SD = 8.09) for the normal ramp and
7.31 (SD = 7.95) for the slow ramp.

2.3.3. Room

The room used in this experiment was square and 645 cm in width.
There were 3 windows in the room that were covered with completely
occulting curtains to avoid daylight pollution over the controlled
setting. The hemispherical-hemispherical reflectance (pyy) was of 0.88
for the wall, 0.21 for the floor, 1.00 for the ceiling and the top board of
the table had a hemispherical-hemispherical reflection of .58. A curtain
separated the room approximately in the middle to hide experimenters
from the participants. The table, at which participants were seated, was
centred between the two luminaires described above in order to avoid
glare. On the table, a 15” laptop was positioned so that the screen was at
the table centre. The screen slightly tilted back at an angle of 15°.

2.3.4. Sensors

Two Hagners SD2 illuminance meters, placed on each side of the
laptop, were dedicated to illuminance measurement. Room temperature
was measured using 2 Ptl100 Thermistance sensors. All the four

Participants
Location

and
Themal
Sensors

Insolight
Luminaire

a ES TC Pe

 

Experimenters
Location

 

LL!

Fig. 2. Plan view of the experiment room. Participants were sited in front of a computer below the two luminaires. A curtain separated the experimenters from the

participants.
M. Papinutto et al.

environmental condition sensors had a linear output to a Keysight
34970A Data-logger calibrated according to ISO 9001:2015 [28].
Regarding screen luminance, an Elma 1337 luminance meter was used
to record the screen’s adaptive behaviour.

2.4. Procedure

Participants were randomly assigned to a screen condition, either
fixed or adaptive luminance. Both modalities started at a white-point
brightness of 120 cd/m2 as recommended by ISO 3664:2009 [27]
with an illuminance of 550 lux. In the adaptive modality, the screen
luminance changed according to illuminance, whereas in the fixed
modality screen luminance remained the same no matter the illumi-
nance. All participants performed three different blocks with the three
ramps modalities (0.5, 1 or 2 lux per second). Each block contained a
steady phase of 5 min at 550 lux (hereafter called baseline) where the
light did not change and one ramp modality. This steady phase allowed
the participant’s visual adaptation before the ramping phase. The ramp
modality dimmed the light at.

the specified rate until reaching complete darkness. Participants
execute the three blocks in a random order of the steepness of the ramps
(see Fig. 3).

At their arrivals, participants had to fill in the consent form. Upon
agreement, the experiment pursued, otherwise they were discarded and
their data deleted. Participants started the experiment by filling in the
two NEO-PI sub-scales. Then they were trained on 30 trials of the MTF.
This training was used in a QUEST procedure in order to estimate the
fractions’ speed required to achieve 80% accuracy. Then participants
went through the three experiment blocks while executing the MTF task,
with new bubbles always appearing from the left side of the screen.
During a block, participants could take breaks at any time but had to
fulfil a short questionnaire on thermal and visual comfort before resting
(see Table A). During these breaks, participants could intervene to
change light intensity as long as the ramp phase was running. To do this,
participants were presented with a slider from 0 to 100 (as a linear
percentage of the maximum light intensity of 550 lux), on which they
could repeatedly click to adjust the lighting to their preferred light level.
In the case of participants operated a change, the ramp stopped, but the
experiment pursued with steady light of the chosen intensity for the time
required for the block to end. The fast, the normal and the slow ramps
were about 5, 10 and 20 min long, respectively. The duration of each
block was thus about 10,15 and 25 min, respectively. The experiment
was about 90 min long (see Fig. 3 for a schematic view of the experi-
ment’s course).

Assign screen condi-

tion (adaptive or fixed)

 

Training Phase
(QUEST Procedure)

Building and Environment 186 (2020) 107356

2.5. Data analysis

Time series data collected during this experiment differed in sam-
pling rate due to different hardware capabilities. The data were
reprocessed using down-sampling in order to have one sample per sec-
onds. Eye movements data were categorised by the SMI software
BeGaze. From categorised data, i.e. blinks, fixations and saccades, both the
rate and the duration were extracted and smoothed using Savitzky and
Golay filter [38]. Reaction to light dimming was assessed by the answer
yes to the question about the willingness to change the light. Further-
more, the amount of light in lux after and before participants operate
changes were recorded.

To investigate the physiological reaction, we used Matrix Profile
(MP) [45]. MP computes two components: a minimal distance profile
(normalised Euclidean distance) and a profile index (nearest-neighbour
index/location). To compute the MP, sliding window size is chosen and
then the algorithm computes the distance for the windowed
sub-sequence against the entire time series, updates the distance profile
with the minimal values and stores the index of the nearest-neighbour.

As presented in Ref. [23], this algorithm allows for segregating time
series by estimating at each point in time the number of nearest neigh-
bour pairs with elements located on both sides of this point, called links.
The corrected amount of links is computed through the profile index by
the FLUSS algorithm, which returns the Corrected Arc Curve (CAC)
measurements [23]. The lower the CAC, the lower number of links at
this location. A small number represents a low amount of similarity
between the two sides of the time series, suggesting a potential change of
regime. Thus a low value of CAC is used to estimate the likelihood of a
state change.

We computed CAC from the beginning of ramping to the behavioural
reaction or the end when no reaction occurred. A robust CAC threshold
for segregation of time series was computed on a steady baseline using
95% confidence intervals (CI) similarly to Gharghabi and colleagues
[23]. If the time series were able to be cut with a certainty above the
threshold, the cut was considered as an indication of physiological
indices for visual discomfort. Otherwise, the time series was considered
to be dependant on its whole length and thus could not be segregated.

Python and R were used to conduct data analysis. Python was used to
compute MP and data visualisation, and R was used to conduct Linear
Mixed Models on which hypothesis testing of the main effects and
interaction were computed using ANOVAs.

Finally, we used the Baseline (steady light of 5 min) of each block to
train neural networks (NNs) (long short term memory (LSTM) or con-
volutional) to classify the reaction of participants to light dimming. This
training was performed using the McFly Python package, which selects
the best NN architecture out of several [42].

Testing Phase

 

 

The testing phase consisted in (block order randomised):

Block 1 (e.g. nor- Block 2 (e.g. fast Block 3 (e.g. slow
mal ramp (1 lux/s)) ramp (2 lux/s)) ramp (0.5 lux/s))

600 600
400 400
00 00

% 10 20 0
min

600
400
00
10. 20 % 10 20
min min

Fig. 3. Schema of the experiment’s procedure. Participants were first assigned to a screen luminance condition. Then, they went through the training phase and
finally through the testing phases consisting in a randomised order of the three ramping speeds.
M. Papinutto et al.

3. Results
3.1. Reactions to light dimming

First, regarding reactions, some of the participants did not react to
some light dimming blocks, ie., within the block, they only answered
“No” when asked whether they wanted to change light. A total of 10
blocks (8.85% of the total number of blocks) were discarded from the
analysis for this reason. Regarding reactions of participants that reacted
to light dimming by changing the level of light, we found two cases of
behaviour during this experiment. Some reactions intervened during
ramps, whereas others in complete darkness. About 37.27% of reactions
occurred during ramps (this behaviour will subsequently be called
reactive behaviour), and 62.73% reacted once reached complete dark-
ness at the end of a ramp (non-reactive behaviour). Interestingly, some
participants took another break before the end of the experiments
without operating any change on the light. This was the case in 6 out of
the 69 non-reactive behaviour (8.69%). Thus, very few participants took
a break without changing light. They either took a break and changed
the light or did not take a break at all during the ramping phase.

The difference in the number of reactions observed between these
two categories was significant, 7°(3) = 7.21, p = .007. However, within
each behaviour, category there was a homogeneous distribution be-
tween ramp and screen conditions. Hence, our conditions did not affect
the balance between the two categories of behaviour.

There were no significant differences in the increase in lux after re-
action neither in principal effects: between behaviour categories, ramps
modalities or screen modalities, nor in interaction effects between those
variables. Regardless of the condition in which participants were and
when they reacted, the amount of lux change required was on average of
156.30 lux (SD = 151.39) above the current level.

Interestingly, there was a significant difference between behaviour
categories in the amount of lux chosen. Indeed, non-reactive behaviour
required 158.85 lux on average (SD = 159.48) whereas reactive
behaviour required 251.37 lux (SD = 186.41), F(1,82.39) = 6.38, p =
.013. Moreover, there was a significant effect of interaction between
screen condition and behaviour categories. Non-reactive behaviours
required a higher illuminance in fixed screen luminance (M = 173.94,
SD = 135.09) than in adaptive screen luminance (M = 143.33, SD =
181.98), whereas this was not the case for reactive behaviours, F
(1,82.39) = 4.84, p = .031 (see Fig. 4).

3.2. Light quantity at the time of the reaction to light dimming

Among the two categories of behaviour — the reactive that reacted
during a ramping phase and the non-reactive that reacted at the end of it
— this section focuses on reactive behaviours only, i.e. behaviours
produced during ramps, before complete darkness. There was no effect

Screen
Condition
[) Adaptive

(7) Fixed

Chosenilluminance(inlux)

 

Reactive Non-reactive

Behavior categories

Fig. 4. Violin plots of the illuminance amount chosen by participants. Specif-
ically, it shows the interaction between the screen condition and the behav-
iour categories.

Building and Environment 186 (2020) 107356

of ramps, nor screen conditions on behaviours. However, all combina-
tion of our conditions exhibited a median below the minimum recom-
mended amount of 300 lux (see Fig. 5). More particularly, fixed screen
luminance with slow (Mdn = 184.27, CI = [14.29, 286.30]) and normal
ramps (Mdn = 140.60, CI = [9.16, 236.27]) were significantly below the
recommended minimal value (CIs do not encompass the threshold).

3.3. Inter-individual characteristics and preferences

3.3.1. NEO-PI and task characteristics

We did not find any effect of both screen and ramp conditions neither
on fraction speed nor on perceived task difficulty.

The contingency table on NEO-PI extroversion and openness sub-
scales indicated that the distribution was significantly heterogeneous
for the behaviour categories. The same result was found for the two
NEO-PI sub-scales with a majority in medium categories and minority in
the head and tail categories, reflecting the assumption of a normal dis-
tribution in the population.

The contingency table revealed a significant effect of interaction
between screen condition and the extroversion sub-scale, 77(3) = 25.60,
p <.001 and openness sub-scale, y7(3) = 32.09, p < .001, indicating that
highly open or highly extrovert participants elicited more reactions in
fixed screen luminance whereas this amount equalises in the medium
categories for both screen conditions.

A significant effect was found as well between behaviour categories
and the extroversion, y(3) = 25.45, p < .001 and openness sub-scale,
7°(3) = 16.88, p < .001. The latter revealed that highly opened partic-
ipants elicited an equally distributed number of behaviours across
behaviour categories. Interestingly, less open-minded participants pro-
duced more non-reactive behaviours. The former effect indicated that
there was a significantly higher number of non-reactive behaviours in
low extrovert participants, whereas very highly extrovert participants
elicited more reactive behaviours (see Fig. 6).

3.3.2. Socio-demographic data

First, no difference in age range were found across screen or ramp
conditions nor across behaviour categories. The contingency table on
handiness and gender revealed that behaviour categories, handiness.

and gender were not homogeneously distributed. This is due to our
sample tested which consisted of psychology students and to the rep-
resentation of handiness in the population with a large majority of right-
handed persons. Interaction effects were found between behaviour
categories and gender y7(1) = 7.33, p = .007, revealing that males were
mostly non-reactive, whereas females produce both reactive and non-
reactive behaviour equally (see Table 1). Additionally, a significant
interaction effect was found between screen condition and handiness
7°(1) = 8.01, p = .005, indicating that there was the same amount of
reaction in fixed and adaptive screen luminance for right-handed,

Screen Condition
[~~ Adaptive
[7] Fixed

500

N Ww >
° o °
o oa o

Iluminance(inlux)

RP
o
o

 

Slow (0.5 lux/s) Normal (1 lux/s) Fast (2 lux/s)

Ramps

Fig. 5. Violin plots of the illuminance amount when reactive behaviour was
produced according to screen and ramp conditions. The black horizontal line
indicates the threshold below which light is presumed uncomfortable according
to standards.
M. Papinutto et al.

Behavior Categories
Mm Reactive
mm Non-Reactive

Frequency inpercentage

Very Low Low Medium High
Extraversion Label

Very High

Building and Environment 186 (2020) 107356

 

Very Low Low Medium High Very High

Openess Label

Fig. 6. Bar charts for the frequency within openness (left) or extroversion (right) and behaviour categories.

Table 1

Contingency table for the three-way interaction effect between screen condi-
tions, behaviour categories and gender. Numbers indicates the number of
reactions.

Screen Condition Behaviour Category Gender
Female Male
Adaptive Reactive 16 2
Non-Reactive 31 3
Fixed Reactive 23 0
Non-Reactive 23 12

whereas left-handed participants mostly showed a reactive behaviour in
fixed screen luminance. Finally, a three-way interaction was found be-
tween screen condition, behaviour categories and gender (1) = 7.58, p
= .006, showing that in adaptive screen luminance females elicited more
non-reactive behaviours whereas males elicited the same amount of
both non-reactive and reactive behaviours (see Table 1). This effect is
inverted in fixed screen luminance: female elicited the same amount in
both categories of behaviours, whereas male elicited non-reactive be-
haviours only.

3.3.3. Questionnaires

Several ratings performed during the break were collected (see Ap-
pendix A). In this section, only the ratings performed during a break
required to change light will be analysed. These ratings differed signif-
icantly according to behaviour categories. Indeed, reactive behaviours
indicated dryer eyes (M =

0.85, SD = 0.99) than non-reactive behaviours (M = 0.51, SD =
0.95), F(1,86.00) = 4.78, p = .031.

Contingency table describing the three-way interaction effect.

More negative feeling about the light was expressed by participants
that elicited non-reactive behaviours (M = —1.27, SD = 0.99), whereas
participants that elicited reactive behaviours expressed a more positive
feeling about the light at the time of operating a change (M = 0.0.73, SD
= 1.14), F(1,96.81) = 5.10, p = .026.

Light was judged to be more acceptable when having reactive be-
haviours (M = 52.95,SD = 25.99) than when having non-reactive be-
haviours (M = 39.39,SD = 23.88), F(.,77.17) = 4.07, p = .047.

Regarding our variables, the wish for a different light differed ac-
cording to screen condition. With adaptive screen luminance, partici-
pants wanted to have a dimmer light (M = 1.59,SD = 0.75) than with
fixed screen luminance (M = 2.02,SD = 0.51), F(1,33.54) = 5.48, p.025.

3.4. Investigation of physiological indices

This section presents the investigation of the physiological indices
and the evaluation of whether physiological reactions intervene before
behavioural reactions, using Corrected Arc Curve (CAC) measurements
produced by the FLUSS algorithm, as mentioned in the data analysis part
of the method section. The lower the CAC, the higher the probability of

segregating the time series. To ensure valid segregation, we computed a
robust threshold for CAC. Measured physiological indices gathered in
this experiment were passed to this algorithm. When CAC goes beyond
this threshold, the segregation was possible, and the illuminance
amount was extracted (see Fig. 7).

This resulted in an illuminance amount for each participant, ramp
and physiological measurement. This extraction of illuminance was
subsequently compared to the amount of illuminance when participants
elicited a behavioural reaction. First, some indices were not found to be
good candidates for segregation as no or little segregation points were
found in the CAC. This was the case for the number of blinks, saccades
number and skin temperature that exhibited none or very few data
points. Then, no physiological indices were significantly above the
reactive behaviours of participants. Nevertheless, interestingly, fixations
number intervened significantly above the 300 lux threshold, as CIs did
not encompass the threshold (Mdn = 381.83, 95% CI = 312.04-451.61,
see Fig. 8).

3.5. Prediction of the behaviour category

Using the baseline recordings (steady light of 5 min), we trained
neural networks (LSTM or convolutional architecture) to classify
behaviour categories (reactive and non-reactive) based on physiological
and psychological indices. The best architecture was convolutional
neural networks, which provided the subsequent results. On the one
hand, eye movements (saccades, blinks and fixations number and

2.55 555
©
1.40 i 475 3
s I 3
5 i =
= 0.25 395 §
3 | 5
7 s
Z -0.90 315 §
° =
&
% =2.05 235
u. ———
YU
—
UO

 

0 200 400 600 800 1000
Time (in Seconds)

Fig. 7. Illustration of the corrected arc curve computation (CAC) and the
extraction of illuminance at the detected segregation. Top: illuminance and the
normalised fixation numbers for participant 17 during the slow ramp and in
fixed screen luminance. Bottom: CAC value with the threshold (horizontal
dashed line) and minimum (vertical dashed line). The extracted physiological
reaction from the CAC computation (green dot) happens before and at a higher
level of illuminance than the behavioural reaction (red dot). (For interpretation
of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the
Web version of this article.)
M. Papinutto et al.

500

400

300

200

luminance (inlux)

100

Blinks Blinks

Fixations Fixations Pupil
Duration Number Duration Number Size

Saccades Saccades A-Prime Heart Skin
Amplitude Number(Performanca Rate Temperature

Building and Environment 186 (2020) 107356

 

Reaction

Measurements

Fig. 8. Violin plots of the illuminance amount when the reaction was found in physiological indices using Matrix Profile. The horizontal line represents the minimum
recommended threshold by standards. Vertical dashed line separate physiological reaction from the reaction to ramps. None of the physiological is significantly

above reaction.

duration) allow predicting behaviour categories with 63.64% accuracy
(training accuracy: 75.00%). On the other, questionnaires on light
perception allowed to predict behaviour categories with an accuracy of
76.67% (training accuracy: 86.36%) Including both indices together in a
CNN provided the best result: a prediction of 81.82% (training accuracy:
96.67%) of the behaviour categories based on steady light.

4. Discussion

This study was aimed at investigating the reaction to naturalistic
light dimming rates in controlled conditions and the impact of screen
auto-dimming on reactions. Such a setting is crucial to draw more
ecologically valid conclusions from a controlled experiment on visual
comfort and to the best of our knowledge was never used before. We
used socio-demographical data and psychological traits’ assessment to
identify idiosyncratic differences and preferences in visual comfort.
Additionally, we measured several physiological markers to evaluate
their potential to provide an early indication of discomfort. Despite the
number of studies on reaction to light dimming, none of these studies
examined light ramping in controlled conditions. Instead, they used
unnatural ramps, included uncontrolled daylight in the setting and did
not control for the inter-individual variability in the task difficulty.
Moreover, the impact of back-lighting was overlooked, whereas devices
implementing such screen control change considerably visual comfort
conditions. Similarly, socio-demographical and physiological indices
were also neglected in previous studies on visual comfort.

Similarly to Begemann and colleagues [5], who discovered two
categories of behaviour — Mr Bright and Mr Dim Light — our results
revealed two distinct behaviours that we called reactive and non-reactive
behaviours. While Begeman and colleagues did identify those groups,
they did not provide information on either the proportion of such
behaviour, their interaction with light or the underlying idiosyncratic
characteristics of those profiles. In our study, we observed about $ of
reactive behaviours and 2 of non-reactive behaviours. When intervening
on light, these two groups chose a significantly different illuminance
(higher for reactive behaviours), but surprisingly increased it by the
same amount (+300 lux). Interestingly, such results suggest that visual
comfort can be reached accordingly to the conditions at the time of the
reaction. Moreover, no matter the condition, the increment remains the
same, indicating that the ratio between actual light and chosen light
does matter.

Our results suggest that these two categories of behaviour did not

originate from our conditions (screen and ramp condition) but originate
from psychological characteristics. Indeed, we found that highly open
and extrovert participants elicited more reactive behaviour than less
extrovert or open participants. These two categories had different per-
ceptions of light and bodily sensations before operating changes on
lighting. For instance, reactive behaviours seemed to have occurred due
to perceived ocular dryness, as reactive behaviours were produced with
perceived dryer eyes than when non-reactive behaviours occurred.
Additionally, non-reactive behaviours reported a more negative feeling
about light, and they judged the visual environment as less acceptable
than reactive behaviours at the time of the reaction. This indicates that
non-reactive behaviours intervene too late to maintain visual comfort.
Indeed, reactive behaviours felt “normal” to “slightly good” about light,
whereas non-reactive behaviour expressed a feeling between “slightly
bad” to “bad” when the reaction occurred. Altogether, these findings
shed light on the importance to consider psychological traits in visual
comfort and more broadly in comfort studies: such indices would allow
discriminating between individuals or group of individuals to provide a
personalised comfort as opposed to average satisfaction measurement.

Screen luminance had an impact on the perception of light and more
particularly over the wish for different lighting. Adaptive screen lumi-
nance makes participants require a low light level which, as stated in the
introduction, can have detrimental health effects as compared to a fixed
amount of screen luminance. This finding calls for the inclusion of screen
luminance adaptability in visual comfort studies to provide a better
match with occupants’ preferences achieving optimal visual comfort.
More generally, it raises the importance to include the abilities provided
by new technologies in comfort assessments to strengthen ecological
validity from empirical data.

Surprisingly, our manipulation did not impact on the moment of the
reaction towards light dimming. Screen condition did not have any
impact on the light when reactive behaviours occurred, and neither did
the ramps condition. This last result is in line with most studies on ramps
[1,33] even when unnatural ramps were used. Importantly, most reac-
tive behaviours were elicited below the recommended amount of light.
This was particularly the case in slow and normal ramp (0.5 and 1 lux
per seconds respectively) with a fixed screen luminance where all re-
actions intervened below 300 lux. Reactive behaviour was found to
allow 69.05% of dimming on average (CI = [7.09, 98.49]). On the
overall, including non-reactive behaviours, our participants tolerated
about 88.46% of dimming on average(CI = [23.95, 100.00]). This
finding is higher than previous research and could be explained by the
M. Papinutto et al.

young age of our participants and thus new habits using back-lit screens.
However, such an assumption is difficult, if not impossible, to confirm as
none of the previous studies provided average and dispersion of their
participants’ age. Another aspect that can explain this difference is
found in the variety of tasks done on back-lit screens compared to
paperwork. Nevertheless, this finding suggests that most participants
feel comfortable with a lower amount of illuminance than the ones
proposed by standards. Future energy-saving strategies could exploit
this finding by eliciting for each occupant an optimal illuminance level,
while being careful about maintaining healthy lighting conditions.

Altogether, the association between psychological trait and behav-
iours, the bad feeling about light reported with non-reactive behaviours
and the fact that reactive behaviour was found to occur below the 300
lux standards threshold raises the need for other cues to anticipate oc-
cupants behavioural reaction to light. Physiological indices could pro-
vide such cues allowing to intervene on light before occupants
behavioural reactions but had never been studied within the framework
of light ramps. Our analysis confirmed this hypothesis. Indeed, although
some indices were found to be nonrelevant for visual comfort research,
most indices were found to be potential measurements of bodily re-
actions to light. This was especially the case for eye movements based
indices which were found to be the most promising. Furthermore, even
though no significant differences between behavioural reactions and
bodily reactions were found, fixations number transitions intervened
above the 300 lux standards threshold. Thus, fixations number emerges
as a reliable cue to provide early intervention on occupants’ visual
environment. Other eye-movement indices such as blinks duration bear
the potential to provide early indications about visual comfort as tran-
sitions mostly occur around 300 lux. Importantly, this novel finding
opens the path toward the implementation of a semi-automated system,
ensuring individual optimal visual comfort.

Finally, eye-movements indices and questionnaires about the visual
environment were found to be good predictors of behaviour categories,
and most particularly only considering data recorded on steady light
(baseline). Such indices allow thus not only to provide an early indica-
tion of discomfort before occupants notice the need to operate changes
to the building infrastructure but also to categorise occupants’ behav-
iour before any interaction is made. Altogether, our findings on physi-
ological markers unveil their importance to improve the acceptance of
interventions on visual comfort.

While our methodology provided a tightly controlled experiment
revealing the usefulness of physiological indices as well as psychological
traits in comfort fields, it is worth emphasizing the limitations of the
proposed experiment. The naturalistic ramping rates helped to evaluate
the reaction to sunset-like decreases in light, but the most ecologically
valid setting remains a decrease in global lighting resulting from
daylight and electrical lighting typically observed in Winter. Another
limitation lies in the context in which participants were evaluated.
While reflecting a typical office layout, it did not completely mimic an
actual office with its corresponding work atmosphere. Additionally, our
controlled task did not reflect a typical office task such as typing or
reading. Also, all windows were completely obscured to allow for tight
lighting control. While sound for controlled experiment design, all such
limitations could have impacted our results.

To leverage on our results, research on visual comfort and Human
Building Interaction (HBI) should take into account physiological data
and evaluate psychological trait to help occupants maintain their level
of comfort. Differences in psychological trait and eye-movements in the
case of visual comfort were found to provide reliable markers,

Building and Environment 186 (2020) 107356

confirming the fruitful outcomes emanating from the integration of
social-sciences methodologies in comfort research suggested by Hong
et al. [25]. Thus, rather than coerce changes as is currently the case with
presence detectors, HBI should suggest changes to each occupant ac-
cording to their idiosyncratic differences psychological traits. Other
indices such as locus of controls were found to impact the proclivity to
react [24] and thus provide additional cues. Hence, future research
should focus on the investigation of the psychological trait of these two
— reactive and non-reactive — behaviours and how they impact other
aspects of comfort. This will allow to best accommodate to idiosyncratic
characteristics of occupants. Physiological indices and questionnaires
about lighting could be used to develop machine learning systems
providing a semicontrolled interaction between occupants and the
building. Moreover, in the case of visual comfort, further investigation
should be pursued to evaluate the potential payoff in time spent in
comfortable light and thus in satisfaction and well-being. Additionally,
further studies should extend our results to more ecological settings such
as offices during natural decreasing daylight with more ecological
computer works, as per se our study was restricted to a laboratory
setting and used exclusively electrical lighting, and notably without CCT
control.

5. Conclusions

This study was aimed at filling in identified gaps in the current
literature on visual comfort in light dimming conditions, namely the lack
of natural ramps, controlled task, evaluation of adaptive screen lumi-
nance impact, socio-demographical, psychological and physiological
indices measurements. The ramping speed and the screen luminance
adaptability were manipulated. Our results revealed that there were two
categories of behaviour that we called reactive and non-reactive. These
two categories emanated from different psychological traits, and in fine,
they judged and felt light differently. Regarding our manipulation, our
data showed that fixed luminance provides enough luminance from the
back-lit display and thus makes occupants react later, except in the
fastest ramp. Overall, reactions were produced below the recommended
threshold, even in reactive behaviours. Nevertheless, one way to over-
come this issue lies in the use of physiological indices. More specifically,
the state of the number of fixations shifts before reaching the standards
threshold of 300 lux. Moreover, eye-movements conjointly with ques-
tionnaires on visual comfort allowed to predict behaviour categories
with reasonable accuracy. Thus, HBI and visual comfort research should
leverage on these findings and pursue the goal of an adaptive environ-
mental visual comfort that takes into consideration subjective charac-
teristics and individual needs.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the Smart Living Lab in Fribourg Switzerland
and in particular the Building 2050 group for providing us with the
experimentation room. We would also like to thank the eye and brain
mapping laboratory (iBMLab) in the Department of Psychology, at the
University of Fribourg, for lending us the eye-tracking glasses.
M. Papinutto et al.

Appendix A

Table A
Questions asked before each breaks.

Topic

Global Well-being

Eyes Sake

Tiredness

Task Difficulty

Visual Psychological Comfort

Question
How do you find visual conditions ?
At what point are tired ?

How difficult do you find the task ?
How do you find visual conditions ?

Building and Environment 186 (2020) 107356

Scale
Likert
Likert

Likert
Likert

Visual Comfort
Visual Sensation
Visual Preference
Visual Judgement
Light Change
Thermal Psychological Comfort
Thermal Comfort
Thermal Sensation
Thermal Preference
Thermal Judgement
Temperature Change

How do you feel with visual conditions ?

Would you rather have a different luminosity ?

On a scale from 0 to 100 how do you evaluate your visual environment ?
Would you like to perform change on lighting ?

How do you find thermal conditions ?

How do you feel with thermal conditions ?

Would you rather have a different temperature ?

On a scale from 0 to 100 how do you evaluate your visual environment ?
Would you like to perform change on lighting ?

Likert
Likert
Percentage
Binary
Likert

Likert
Likert
Percentage
Binary

References [20] K. Fridell, Daylight Visual Comfort and Quality of Light Syn-Tes Report 8,
Technical Report October, 2013.
[1] Y. Akashi, J. Neches, A. Bierman, Energy Savings for Load-Shedding Ballast for [21] M. Frontczak, P. Wargocki, Literature survey on how different factors influence
Fluorescent Lighting Systems Technical report ® 002 8 human comfort in indoor environments, Build. Environ. 46 (4) (2011) 922-937.
[2] H.S. Alavi, D. Lalanne, J. Nembrini, E. Churchill, D. Kirk, W. Moncur, Future of [22] M. Carparino, a Bender ew Bicar’ °- Tognetti, cpa a k and
humanbuilding interaction, in: Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended wearable wireless mult sensor device tor rea time computerized biowea>ack an
Abstract. u Fact a C tine Syst ACM. 2016 34083414 data acquisition, in: 2014 4th International Conference on Wireless Mobile
(3) H ¢ ‘Alavi i Vewma MM. Papinutto, D. halons Cont fort Nn coon nate of user , Communication and Healthcare-Transforming Healthcare through Innovations in
— a a a ° Mobil d Wireless Technologies (MOBIHEALTH), IEEE, 201 . 39-42,
experience in interactive built environments, in: IFIP Conference on Human- 2 ° ' ° i. — “ss seme ooh (MO » » 2014, r 8° 4 fil
Computer Interaction, Springer, 2017, pp. 247-257. [23] S. G argnabls YX. Ding, CCM. Ye K Kamgar, LU anova, E. Keogh, Matrix profile
[4] R.A. Baron, M.S Rea. SG Daniels E fects of indoor lighting (illuminance and viii: domain agnostic online semantic segmentation at superhuman performance
~ a 0 ° levels, in: 2017 IEEE I ional f Data Mini ICDM), IEEE, 201
spectral distribution) on the performance of cognitive tasks and interpersonal op. ot x ’ ntemnational Gonferenes on Data Mining (CD), 2017
ooo aa potential mediating role of positive affect, Motiv. Emot. 16 (1) [24] D. Gursoy, K.W. McCleary, L.R. Lepsito, Propensity to complain: effects of
[5] s Begemann G. Van den Beld, A. Tenner, Daylight, artificial light and people in an personality and behavioral factors, J. Hospit. Tourism Res. 31 (3) (2007) 358-386.
, a oo ; ° 25] T.H D.Y .D’ .-f. Chen, T i i behavi
office environment, overview of visual and biological responses, Int. J. Ind. Ergon. [25] . buikh . he ° i. Oca, C - “ questions concerning occupant behavior
20 (3) (1997) 231-239 in “ ines the iB pic Bui environ. (2017) oO
. 2 S. I D.N. Chin, M.E. A i i i
[6] L. Bellia, F. Fragliasso, G. Riccio, Daylight fluctuations effect on the functioning of [26] C 6. Ike ane, “ me Crosby, A model for integrating ane ‘aptive .
different daylight-linked control systems, Build. Environ. (2018) doi: 10.1016/ information filter utilizing biosensor data to assess cognitive load, in: International
[7] S. Berman, M. Navvab, M. Martin, J. Sheedy, W. Tithof, A comparison of traditional [27] conference on User Modeling, Springer 2008. ee hea hy. 2009
and high colour temperature lighting on the near acuity of elementary school ° li S P By Srapny, ‘
children, Light. Res. Technol. 38 (1) (2006) 41-49 [28] ISO, one ity eee ee en — hohe ana
° . . : . 2 . Ku .B T. Lai B. Mi i .T The i i
[8] P.M. Bluyssen, M. Aries, P. van Dommelen, Comfort of workers in office buildings: [29] R. Kuler, S, Ballal, a7 ae, . tkellides, G. Tone 0, ue impact © 8 tan
the european hope project, Build. Environ. 46 (1) (2011) 280-288 colour on psychological mood: a cross-cultural study of indoor work environments,
° : . - ° E i 1 2 1 —1 .
[9] C. Cajochen, S. Frey, D. Anders, J. Spati, M. Bues, A. Pross, R. Mager, A. Wirz- het ak ee 4) ( Oe 490-1507 f attitud hi £ hol
Justice, O. Stefani, Evening exposure to a light-emitting diodes (led)-backlit [30] 4 10) ae A \ nique for the measurement of attitudes, Archives of psychology 22
» VU. z ' : - ws 140) (1932) 55.
Pheer “ 10 (5) sot circadian physiology and cognitive performance, J. Appl. [31] J. Nembrini, J.H. Kampf, M. Papinutto, D. Lalanne, A smart luminaire in an office
. —_ . . : . li h di ib . . . d f . :
[10] S. Carlucci, F. Causone, F. De Rosa, L. Pagliano, A review of indices for assessing Joutnal of Physic. Conference coin wat 1343, 10? Publishing Sol Sion 64
iline itecmted desien, wo hein Sustain theres Rev ry (a1) lon . o83 [32] G.R. Newsham, R. Marchand, J. Svec, J.A. Veitch, The effect of power constraints
? . : . - . lighting choi d satisfaction : a pil dy, IESNA Annu. f.
[11] CEN, Light and lighting - lighting of work places - part 1 : indoor work, Eur. Stand. cle Non et 8002) 1 . Sat, sooo, action : a ptiot study, IES nu. Gon
3 (2002) 1-43. ISSN 978 0 580 68495 1, http://www.din.de. [33] G.R Newsham C.L. Donnell S Mancini R.G. Marchand, W. Lei, K.E. Charles, J
[12] K. Chakrabarti, R.V. Kaczmarek, J.A. Thomas, A. Romanyukha, Effect of room a. Veitch The effect of ram e in tem erature and electric li ht level on office _
illuminance on monitor black level luminance and monitor calibration, J. Digit. occupan ts - a literature toviegy anda laboratory experiment - Proc. 2006 ACEEE
ne eo (2003) 350-355, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10278-003-1720-5. ISSN Summer Study Energy Effic, Build. Pacific Grove, California, 2006, 4-252.
, .W. Pei Psychopy—psychophysi f i h .N i. Method
[13] G. Chinazzo, J. Wienold, Sensitivity Analysis of Visual and Thermal Parameters for [34] : S 4) (2007) et 3 Psychophysics software in python, J. Neurosci. Methods
Energy Savings : Combining Illuminance and ... (August), 2017. , d “ne 1 ‘Ib light illumi hori land
[14] CIE, Lighting of Indoor Work Places”, 2002, pp. 1-19, https://doi.org/10.3403/ [35] A. Perez-Burgos, A. de Miguel, J. Bilbao, Daylight illuminance on horizontal an
02 6098 65. ISO 8995 CIE $ 008/E ? ee ? . . . vertical surfaces for clear skies. case study of shaded surfaces, Sol. Energy 84 (1)
re - a a (2010) 137-143.
[15] Nove eee ome worsy ° pricey vacation for iprgc-influenced responses to [36] I. Pigliautile, S. Casaccia, N. Morresi, M. Arnesano, A.L. Pisello, G.M. Revel,
[16] OT Costa it, RR Mec Cre the Revise d Neo Personality Inventory (Neo-pi-r) Assessing Occupants’ Personal Attributes in Relation to Human Perception of
20 0 8 oo , y vy PIT); Environmental Comfort: Measurement Procedure and Data Analysis, Building and
: . . ae Environment, 2020, p. 106901.
? !
[17] J.K. Day, W. O'Brien, Ob behave! survey stories and lessons learned from building [37] M. Rtiger, M.C. Gordijn, D.G. Beersma, B. de Vries, S. Daan, Weak relationships
occupants in high-performance buildings, Energy research & social science 31 . . . : . .
(2017) 11-20 between suppression of melatonin and suppression of sleepiness/fatigue in
ao ligh . Sl 1 2 221-227.
[18] N.H. Eklund, P.R. Boyce, S.N. Simpson, Lighting and sustained performance: respons oh. rgat Colne & J nn Ke tn (2005) fd ° implified 1
modeling data-entry task performance, J. Illum. Eng. Soc. 30 (2) (2001) 126-141 [38] A. Savitzky, M.J. Golay, Smoothing and differentiation of data by simplified least
[19] J. P, et al., Psychopy, URL, https:/ AWWW psychopy org , , squares procedures, Anal. Chem. 36 (8) (1964) 1627-1639.

10
M. Papinutto et al.

[39] D. Sawicki, A. Wolska, T. Porsch, Glare assessment for research and development of
measurement methods, Przeglkad Elektrotechniczny 95 (2019).

[40] J.E. Sheedy, R. Smith, J. Hayes, Visual effects of the luminance surrounding a
computer display, Ergonomics 48 (9) (jul 2005) 1114-1128, https://doi.org/
10.1080/00140130500208414. ISSN 00140139.

[41] A. Tenner, S. Begemann, G. Van den Beld, Acceptance and preference of
illuminances in offices, in: The European Lighting Conference, 1997, pp. 130-143.

[42] D. Van Kuppevelt, C. Meijer, V. Van Hees, M. Kuzak, Mcfly, April 2017.

11

[43]

[44]

[45]

Building and Environment 186 (2020) 107356

T. Wakamura, H. Tokura, The influence of bright light during the daytime upon
circadian rhythm of core temperature and its implications for nocturnal sleep,
Nurs. Health Sci. 2 (1) (2000) 41-49.

A.B. Watson, D. G. Pelli Quest, A bayesian adaptive psychometric method, Percept.
Psychophys. 33 (2) (1983) 113-120, https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03202828. ISSN
00315117.

C.-C.M. Yeh, Y. Zhu, L. Ulanova, N. Begum, Y. Ding, H.A. Dau, D.F. Silva,

A. Mueen, E. Keogh, Matrix profile i: all pairs similarity joins for time series: a
unifying view that includes motifs, discords and shapelets, in: 2016 IEEE 16th
International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), IEEE, 2016, pp. 1317-1322.
