Np} | Digital Medicine

PERSPECTIVE OPEN

www.nature.com/npjdigitalmed

Blockchain vehicles for efficient Medical Record management

Anuraag A. Vazirani@', Odhran O'Donoghue’, David Brindley* and Edward Meinert@”**

The lack of interoperability in Britain’s medical records systems precludes the realisation of benefits generated by increased
spending elsewhere in healthcare. Growing concerns regarding the security of online medical data following breaches, and
regarding regulations governing data ownership, mandate strict parameters in the development of efficient methods to
administrate medical records. Furthermore, consideration must be placed on the rise of connected devices, which vastly increase
the amount of data that can be collected in order to improve a patient’s long-term health outcomes. Increasing numbers of
healthcare systems are developing Blockchain-based systems to manage medical data. A Blockchain is a decentralised,
continuously growing online ledger of records, validated by members of the network. Traditionally used to manage cryptocurrency
records, distributed ledger technology can be applied to various aspects of healthcare. In this manuscript, we focus on how
Electronic Medical Records in particular can be managed by Blockchain, and how the introduction of this novel technology can
create a more efficient and interoperable infrastructure to manage records that leads to improved healthcare outcomes, while
maintaining patient data ownership and without compromising privacy or security of sensitive data.

npj Digital Medicine (2020)3:1 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41 746-019-021 1-0

BACKGROUND

The attempted reforms to Britain’s medical record systems in
recent years have left an incompletely digitised complex: paper
records remain ubiquitous at the secondary level, in tandem with
several disconnected local Trust-specific electronic systems.
Despite significant advances in the use of technology in clinical
medicine and the large sums of money recently diverted into the
National Health Service'*, administrative systems in healthcare
remain in want of interoperability.

This lack of interoperability can lead not only to clinical errors
but administrative ones, such as the National Health Service's
(NHS’s) recent failure to invite 50,000 women for a cervical
screening test®. Furthermore, patients must recount their history
multiple times, a process found to be inefficient as well as
tiresome, and which can lead to confusion as well as clinical errors
because of incomplete information’.

More importantly, the lack of structure can lead to avoidable
situations in which timely information is unavailable, that have
clinical repercussions. Increasing numbers of systems use Block-
chain in different ways to solve the problem of interoperability, by
empowering doctors with more comprehensive patient data,
acquired from connected but independently managed systems.

BLOCKCHAIN

A Blockchain is a decentralised database, the data within which is
validated by members of the network°. It has traditionally been
used to manage cryptocurrency transaction records, but can also
be applied to various aspects of healthcare such as administration
of prescriptions (and associated fraud prevention), insurance
coverage, and electronic medical record management®. Instead of
trusted third-party signatories (such as VISA in a financial context),
Blockchain uses cryptographic proof to validate records. A
network of users, collectively adhering to a set of pre-agreed
rules, carries out this cryptographic validation. This introduces
integrity, ensuring only one single ‘correct’ version of events is

stored in the database, which cannot be changed subsequently
without the agreement of a majority of nodes. This method works
by locking each set of records in the database (termed a ‘block’) to
the previous block with the use of a hash, such that a change in
one block would modify the hashes of all subsequent blocks.

As well as being at risk of integrity flaws, current healthcare
management systems are vulnerable to cyber attacks, such as the
WannaCry attack in 2017’ that affected computers in 80 of the 236
NHS trusts®, along with more than 250,000 computers in 150
countries. More recently, an attack on SingHealth, Singapore’s
main healthcare group, compromised the data of 1.5 million
Singaporean citizens’. In order to ensure that healthcare systems
do not remain an accessible target for hackers, sufficient
precautions must be put in place to protect patients’ sensitive
data. Blockchain uses public-key cryptography to secure data: a
public and a private key are generated for each user using a one-
way encryption function (hash). These may be used by both
parties in a transaction: the sender signs, and the receiver verifies,
using their own private key, and public keys are used to send
transactions to a recipient (Fig. 1). This allows the recipient to
verify the validity of the chain of information. In addition, only the
recipient can see the information sent, eliminating any possibility
of hacking.

The system can also allow components of arbitrary logic to be
added in order to process, validate, and sanction access to the
data secured within, simplifying consent processes for patients
and doctors. This is known as a smart contract, and functions as a
string of computer code that executes whenever these certain
predetermined conditions are met'®, ensuring both the security of
the system and authorised access. It is this ability to create smart
contracts that makes Blockchain suitable for healthcare, a field in
which strict regulations govern how sensitive data may be
used''’'*, an increasingly important factor following the recent
introduction of the General Data Protection Regulation.

Another major concern relating to healthcare records is the cost
associated with transferring records between locations'*, and in

 

'Medical Sciences Division, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. *Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK. >Department of Primary Care and Public

Health, Imperial College London, London W6 8RP, UK. *email: e.meinert14@imperial.ac.uk

Scripps Research Translational Institute

nN 1 nature partner
PD journals
np}

A.A. Vazirani et al.

 

Send; User 2’s Public Key

Sign; User 1’s Private Key

Receive; User 1’s Public Key

ssoiboud uonoesuel |

Verify; User 2’s Private Key

 

Fig. 1 Progress of a Blockchain transaction. Public-key cryptogra-
phy creates a public and a private key for each user, using a one-way
hash function to create the public from the private key. The public
keys are used by the sender and receiver of a transaction to identify
each other. Private keys remain undisclosed, and are used by the
sender and receiver to sign and verify transactions, respectively.
Here, User 1 sends a transaction to User 2, using User 2's Public key.
User 2 receives the transaction, identified as having been sent by
User 1's public key.

particular between Trusts. Sending data via email is considered a
security risk'*'?, while there is clear inefficiency inherent in
transcribing a digital asset onto optical media, which is commonly
only read once at the receiving site'®. Furthermore, repeated
imaging studies carried out because of unavailability of prior
results can be dangerous in the context of delayed treatment as
well as financially costly. As a decentralised database, Blockchain is
fundamentally interoperable, and authorised sharing of data
comes at no extra cost.

IMPLEMENTATION

Blockchain would most effectively integrate as a mode of
managing access to sensitive health data, although in practise
this could take many forms. In principle, by storing an index of
health records and related metadata linking to the sensitive data
(stored elsewhere on a secure cloud), the system would introduce
a layer of interoperability to the currently disjointed set of
systems'”’'®. This type of framework is exemplified by MedRec'”, a
system employed in Boston, which not only allows data to be
accessed with consent by a patient’s multiple healthcare
providers, but also accommodates access for epidemiological
researchers.

In this framework, a cloud-based medical record is associated
with viewing permissions and data retrieval instructions, thus
using the Blockchain to record patient-provider interactions via
smart contracts. Once a doctor creates a record, it is verified, and
its viewing permissions are authorised by the patient and stored in
a smart contract. The record can never be modified without the
agreement of a majority of nodes (inconvenient and probabil-
istically unlikely). Temporary access can be controlled by the use
of temporary keys (‘tokens’), created by users and passed onto
those such as healthcare providers and insurance companies
(Fig. 2). The token is independent of the data, containing only
authorisation commands, and is validated (by recording it on the
chain) before the required reports are dispatched*?'.

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 1

 

   
 
 

Add/View Permissions

Provider/
Viewer

 
 

EMR Client
oe

Fig. 2. Interactions in the Blockchain-based healthcare system.
Patients have full access to the data via the EMR Client. Data may be
added or viewed by doctors and other providers, who require
permissions to do so, and added by devices including wearables,
which form a part of the Internet of Things (loT). All interactions are
stored on the Blockchain.

  
  

  

Blockchain

INTEGRATION

Twenty-first century healthcare data extends beyond the standard
formats of written reports, DICOM (Digital Imaging and Commu-
nications in Medicine) standard images and basic lab results:
wearable technology such as bracelets and watches, which can
collect more regular information points than manual technology,
are used increasingly. These enhance data collection either by
increasing the frequency of data points or by delivering data in a
more user-friendly format. A more recent example takes the form
of Apple’s ‘iSheet’**?, a patent for a bedding device, which will
take continuous measurements of vital signs, as well as sleep
pattern information. Should the extensive data from these new
contributors to the Internet of Things (the growing network of
connected, data-exchanging devices) be harnessed effectively,
doctors may be able to provide more personalised care based on
the individual's detailed personal data. Data could even be
analysed by artificial intelligence systems, in order to find as yet
undetermined paradigms in personal health.

DISCUSSION

After multiple attempts and delays at becoming fully digital**, the
NHS has now released a ten-year plan’, in which it introduces the
basis for a new twenty-first century service model. This includes
digitally equipping all primary and outpatient care, and empow-
ering patients to access, manage, and contribute to digital
information and services, which includes incorporating data
added by patients themselves. In addition, they pave the way to
improve quality of life for those with long-term conditions by the
use of connected and interoperable devices.

Achieving interoperability, however, depends on patients taking
control of their data and deciding on how it will be used. Data
ownership would need to be shifted from the government to
patients, and while this would require extensive reengineering of
legacy systems, it would hopefully incentivise patients to become
active agents in their own care. By contributing data to the
system, they would be able to get the best possible treatment*””°,
exemplifying the notion of patient-centred care. The re-
engineering of systems would need to keep in mind legal
restrictions, such as the recently introduced General Data
Protection Regulation. Under this law, patients may request for
their data to be erased*’. However, with a Blockchain, a record of
the data’s previous existence would always be maintained on
the chain.

In addition to abiding by legal restrictions on data use,
Blockchain would need to guard against intruders. Not only do
data breaches cause damage by the loss of data to hackers, but
they also have a negative impact on the public perception of the
healthcare field, and threaten to hinder future research through
more stringent regulatory restrictions*®. While a Blockchain is
more secure than older methods*”, most are still susceptible to a

Scripps Research Translational Institute
‘51% attack’, in which a majority of mining nodes collude to
rewrite the chain structure’’. Users must trust that at least 50% of
mining nodes would not want to violate the immutability of the
Blockchain. The use of a ‘permissioned’ (as opposed to
permissionless) Blockchain, however, can allow a_ healthcare
system to rule out any possibility of this style of attack. This
method limits those who can run full nodes, issue transactions,
execute smart contracts and read transaction history to approved
computers and users. This feature therefore increases the integrity
of the system, as well as guarding against hackers, and strength-
ens the system beyond its robust foundation of public-key
cryptography.

Taking into account these concerns, a more practical solution
than expecting patients themselves to take control of their
lifelong health record increasingly seen in the field, is an
independent company-managed electronic health record data-
base. These typically employ Blockchain to secure patient data
and to empower patients in a way that has not previously been
possible.

The concept of Blockchain-based medical record management
has been considered and implemented on a small scale by a
number of companies’*'**; however, only very few healthcare
systems have begun to incorporate the technology into their
nationwide infrastructure. Of those, Estonia is at the forefront,
securing more than one million citizens’ records in a ledger in
collaboration with Guardtime. The system has proven that
interoperability is an achievable goal, and demonstrated that
the ability to analyse data has helped the government to become
aware of and more easily track health epidemics>’.

Additional benefits of using Blockchain for health records
include the ability to analyse the information with artificial
intelligence. This will be more easily able to determine population
trends, which can be used to achieve population level health.
However, it will require careful integration, to allow sufficient
integration without compromising privacy of patient data or
security against hackers.

Further, data gathered from mobile applications, wearable
sensors and other recent forms of technology could also
contribute important information to the system, allowing physi-
cians to create specialised treatment plans based on more
frequent data. This is increasingly possible in an environment
where continuous and detailed data is already being collated by
the Internet of Things. It is also thought that such continuous
health data would engage a patient more in their health care,
improving compliance and long-term outcomes. Open source
software means that different health IT systems could integrate
the use of Blockchain as they wish, making this a versatile
opportunity. The use of wearable technology and the incorpora-
tion of the Internet of Things into Al-based data analysis would
bring forth additional benefits with a larger index of accurate data
points.

Some administrative matters must be considered when
implementing a Blockchain. Removing duplicates when consoli-
dating legacy systems is costly and time-consuming. Once in
place, it is vital that users of the system input good quality
information; otherwise, the trustworthiness of the system arising
from Blockchain’s immutability and decentralisation give way to
the lack of accurate information, creating a critical point of failure.
Nevertheless, the costs associated with educating users on how to
make the most use out of the system would lead to returns in
health outcomes. In the primary stages, usefulness will still
depend on the end user experience, and so the requirement of
hiding the complexities of Blockchain behind a sufficiently user-
friendly interface becomes paramount to ensuring successful
uptake. These primary stages will establish the most effective
systems.

As various healthcare providers and companies update their
record management systems on different timescales, it is

Scripps Research Translational Institute

A.A. Vazirani et al.

np)

 

necessary to consider how multiple ledgers might interact with
one another. We outline below one potential framework to
demonstrate the integration of several Blockchain ledgers
managed by independent healthcare providers (Fig. 3). Another
architecture would involve a system of records managed by
independent companies on behalf of patients, with healthcare
providers given data access but not the privilege of management.
In either case, as individual providers introduce their own ledger
systems using Blockchain’s API, they could connect to a wider
network of Blockchain-based providers, allowing patients to visit
different hospitals, or switch to a different healthcare data
Management company. This would allow doctors more easy
access to a comprehensive set of data, with the patient’s explicit
consent.

CONCLUSION

A Blockchain allows data across multiple independent systems to
be accessed simultaneously and immediately by those with
sufficient permissions. This interfacing of different systems saves
medical and financial sacrifices and reduces administrative delays.
The use of smart contracts allows patients’ consent preferences to
be executed immediately, further reducing administrative costs.
An off Blockchain data lake is scalable and can store a variety of
data types, making it versatile and suitable enough for the
developing forms of data brought about by the Internet of Things
in the healthcare field. Furthermore, it supports high-throughput
data analysis as well as machine learning strategies to be applied,
while being encrypted and digitally signed to ensure data privacy
and authenticity of access. Interoperability achieved in this
manner will allow greater collaboration between patients, doctors
and researchers, leading to specific and personalised care
pathways.

Its weaknesses must however be taken into account during
development: Blockchain involves concepts unfamiliar to the vast
majority of the population, including cryptographic signatures and

 

Patient directory

e Patient A

o 1,2,3
e §=6Patient B

Oo
e Patient C

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

o 2,3
e §6Patient D
o 63
Centre 1 Centre 2 Centre 3
° Patient A ° Patient A ° Patient A
o DataAt o Data A2 o Data A3
e Patient B e Patient C 1 e Patient C
o Data B1 o Data C1 o Data C2
e Patient D
o Data D1

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 3 Connecting independent healthcare providers. Each box
represents a Blockchain ledger. The Patient Directory lists all
pseudonymised patients about whom data is stored across all
providers’ Blockchain ledgers. Associated with each patient is a
pointer to all centres (represented by number) where that individual
has had a medical interaction. Individual Centres store their own
ledgers, containing more detailed metadata (represented by code,
e.g. Data A1, which does not imply storage of sensitive medical
information) about interactions with patients, including associated
cloud-based data storage locations and access permission informa-
tion. When a Centre joins the system (e.g. Centre 3), basic
pseudonymised information about its patients is relayed to the
Patient Directory, allowing other Centres to access that information,
subject to any associated smart contract-based permissions.

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 1
A.A. Vazirani et al.

 

key management. Costs are involved in concealing these and
assimilating data from various legacy systems while maintaining
adherence to various regulatory restrictions.

Nevertheless, Blockchain represents an innovative vehicle to
manage medical records, ensuring interoperability but without
compromising security. It also protects patient privacy, allowing
patients to choose who can view their data. Investments into this
technology would be outweighed by returns as the interfacing of
systems leads to increased collaboration between patients and
healthcare providers, and improved healthcare outcomes.

Exclusive license

The authors grant to the Publishers and its licensees in perpetuity,
in all forms, formats and media (whether known now or created in
the future), to (i) publish, reproduce, distribute, display and store
the Contribution, (ii) translate the Contribution into other
languages, create adaptations, reprints, including within collec-
tions and create summaries, extracts and/or abstracts of the
Contribution and convert or allow conversion into any format,
including without limitation audio, (iii) create any other derivative
work(s) based in whole or part on the on the Contribution, (iv) to
exploit all subsidiary rights to exploit all subsidiary rights that
currently exist or as may exist in the future in the Contribution,
(v) the inclusion of electronic links from the Contribution to third-
party material wherever it may be located and (vi) licence any
third party to do any or all of the above.

Transparency declaration

The authors declare that the manuscript is an honest, accurate,
and transparent account of the study being reported; that no
important aspects of the study have been omitted; and that any
discrepancies from the study as planned (and, if relevant,
registered) have been explained.

DATA AVAILABILITY

This manuscript summarised information from publicly available literature. Any
questions on source data can be forwarded to the corresponding author.

Received: 7 October 2018; Accepted: 22 November 2019;
Published online: 06 January 2020

REFERENCES

1. NHS. The NHS Long Term Plan. https://www.longtermplan.nhs.uk/wp-content/
uploads/2019/08/nhs-long-term-plan-version-1.2.pdf (2019).

2. Gov.uk. PM announces extra £1.8 billion for NHS frontline services. https://www.
gov.uk/government/news/pm-announces-extra-1 8-billion-for-nhs-frontline-
services (2019).

3. lacobucci, G. Cervical screening: GP leaders slam Capita over failure to send up to
48 500 letters. BMJ 363, k4832 (2018).

4. CRICO Strategies. Malpractice risks in communication failures. 2015 CRICO Stra-
tegies National CBS Report. https://www.rmf.harvard.edu/Malpractice-Data/
Annual-Benchmark-Reports/Risks-in-Communication-Failures (2015).

5. Nakamoto, S. Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash system. https://bitcoin.org/
bitcoin.pdf (2008).

6. Engelhardt, M. A. Hitching healthcare to the chain: an introduction to blockchain
technology in the healthcare sector. Technol. Innov. Manag. Rev. 7, 10 (2017).

7. Smart, W. Lessons learned review of the WannaCry Ransomware Cyber Attack.
https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/lessons-learned-
review-wannacry-ransomware-cyber-attack-cio-review.pdf (2018).

8. Morse, A. Investigation: WannaCry cyber attack and the NHS. https://www.nao.
org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/Investigation-WannaCry-cyber-attack-and-
the-NHS.pdf (2018).

9. Field, M. Cyber attack on Singapore health database steals details of 1.5m
including prime minister. https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/201 8/07/20/cyber-
attack-singapore-health-database-steals-details-15m-including/ (2018).

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 1

10. Gordon, W., Wright, A. & Landman, A. Blockchain in health care: decoding the
hype. NEJM Catal. (2017).

11. Mamoshina, P. et al. Converging blockchain and next-generation artificial intel-
ligence technologies to decentralise and accelerate biomedical research and
healthcare. Oncotarget 9, 5665-5690 (2017).

12. Patel, V. A framework for secure and decentralised sharing of medical imaging
data via blockchain consensus. Health Inform. J. 25, 1398-1411 (2018).

13. Patel, V., Barker, W. & Siminerio, E. Trends in consumer access and use of elec-
tronic health information. https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/briefs/
oncdatabrief30_accesstrends_.pdf (2015)

14. Dubovitskaya, A., Xu, Z., Ryu, S., Schumacher, M. & Wang, F. Secure and trustable
electronic medical records sharing using Blockchain. AMIA Annu. Symp. Proc.
2017, 650-659 (2017).

15. U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. The HIPAA Privacy Rule. https://
www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/index.html (2015).

16. Erickson, B. J. Experience with the importation of electronic images into the
medical record from physical media. J. Digit. Imaging 24, 694-699 (2011).

17. Vazirani, A. A., O'Donoghue, O., Brindley, D. & Meinert, E. Implementing Block-
chains for efficient health care: systematic review. J. Med. Internet Res. 21, e12439
(2019).

18. Linn, L. A. & Koo, M. B. Blockchain For health data and its potential use in health IT
and health care related research. https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/1 1-
74-ablockchainforhealthcare.pdf (2016).

19. Azaria, A., Ekblaw, A., Vieira, T. & Lippmann, A. MedRec: using Blockchain for
medical data access and permission management. https://doi.org/10.1109/
OBD.2016.11 (2016).

20. Liang, X. et al. in /C/CS 2017, Lecture Notes Computer Science (eds Qing, S. et al.)
387-398 (Springer, Beijing, China, 2017).

21. Liu, P. T. S. in ICICS 2016, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 9977 (eds Lam, K. Y.
et al.) 254-261 (Springer, Singapore, 2016).

22. U.S. Patent & Trademark Office. Multi-element piezo sensor for in-bed physiolo-
gical measurements. https://www.uspto.gov/ (2018).

23. Bridge, M. Apple plans iSheet to snoop on your snooze. https://www.thetimes.co.
uk/article/apple-plans-isheet-to-snoop-on-your-snooze-p37dmzbmt (2018).

24. National Advisory Group on Health Information Technology in England. Making
IT work: harnessing the power of health information technology to improve
care in England. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/550866/Wachter_Review_Accessible.pdf
(2016).

25. Kitson, A., Marshall, A., Bassett, K. & Zeitz, K. What are the core elements of
patient-centred care? A narrative review and synthesis of the literature from
health policy. J. Adv. Nurs. 69, 4-15 (2013).

26. Stewart, M. Towards a global definition of patient centred care. BMJ 322, 444-445
(2001).

27. Information Commissioner's Office. Guide to the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR). https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-
general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/ (2018).

28. Patil, H. K. & Seshadri, R. Big data security and privacy issues in healthcare. In 20174
IEEE International Congress on Big Data Vol. 112 (ed Kesselman, C.) 762-765 (IEEE,
Anchorage, AK, USA, 2014).

29. Dagher, G. G., Mohler, J., Milojkovic, M. & Marella, P. B. Ancile: privacy-preserving
framework for access control and interoperability of electronic health records
using blockchain technology. Sustain. Cities Soc. 39, 283-297 (2018).

30. Wood, G. Ethereum: A secure decentralized transaction ledger. http://www.
cryptopapers.net/papers/ethereum-yellowpaper.pdf (2014)

31. Convergence of blockchain with emerging technologies set to disrupt the
healthcare industry. Networks Asia (2017).

32. Moss, J., Smith, C. & Davies, J. Blockchain Shows Promise In Healthcare. Medical
Industry Week, BMI Country Industry Reports. 7 (2017).

33. Bau T. Why Estonia is a good place for eHealth (and why you should attend eHealth
Tallinn). https://www.himss.eu/himss-blog/why-estonia-good-place-ehealth-and-
why-you-should-attend-ehealth-tallinn (2017).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by the Sir David Cooksey Fellowship in Healthcare
Translation and the Final Honour School of Medical Sciences, Cell & Systems, Biology
and Neuroscience at the University of Oxford.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

E.M. conceived the study topic and oversaw the project. A.V. investigated and
executed bench research and completed manuscript drafting on his own. O.O’D.

Scripps Research Translational Institute
gave helpful discussion on content. E.M. gave feedback on the completed manuscript
to A.V. and A.V. incorporated all feedback. D.B. also provided feedback on iterations.
The final manuscript was approved by all authors. E.M. is the guarantor.

COMPETING INTERESTS

All authors completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/
coi_disclosure.pdf. There are no relevant conflicts of interest, financial or other types
of relationships that may influence the manuscript declared by authors. Authors do
not have any patents and are not associated to any conditions or circumstances that
may lead to conflicts of interest.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to E.M.

Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints

Scripps Research Translational Institute

A.A. Vazirani et al.

 

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons

BY Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.

© The Author(s) 2020

npj Digital Medicine (2020) 1
