Minerals Engineering 159 (2020) 106646

 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect ea
ENGINEERING

   

Minerals Engineering

cH . ti ‘ 34

ELSEVIER

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/mineng

 

Check for

Repurposing legacy metallurgical data Part I: A move toward dry updates
laboratories and data bank

Yousef Ghorbani® , Glen T. Nwaila”, Steven E. Zhang“, Martyn P. Hay a Lunga C. Bam‘,
Pratama Istiadi Guntoro “

* Department of Civil, Environmental and Natural Resources Engineering, Luled University of Technology, SE-97187 Luled, Sweden
> School of Geosciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Private Bag 3, Wits, 2050, South Africa

© PG Techno Wox, 43 Patrys Avenue, Helikon Park, Randfontein 1759, South Africa

¢ Eurus Mineral Consultants (EMC), Plettenberg Bay, South Africa

© Department Radiation Science, Necsa, PO Box 582, Pretoria, South Africa

 

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

 

 

Keywords:

Data analytics

Dry laboratories

Data bank

Legacy metallurgical data

Advancements in modern mineral processing has been driven by technology and fuelled by market economics of
supply and demand. Over the last three decades, the demand for various minerals has steadily increased, while
the mineral processing industry has seen an unavoidable increase in the treatment of complex ores, continuous
decline in plant feed grade and poor plant performance partly due to blending of ores with dissimilar properties.
Despite these challenges, production plant data that are routinely generated are usually underutilised. In this
contribution and aligned with the direction of the 4th industrial revolution, we highlight the value of legacy
metallurgical plant data and the concept of a dry laboratory approach. This study is presented in two parts. In the
current paper (Part I), a comprehensive review of the potential for the combination of modern analytical
technology with data analytics to generate a new competence for process optimisation are provided. To
demonstrate the value of data within the extractive metallurgy discipline, we employ data analytics and simu-
lation to examine gold plant performance and the flotation process in two separate case studies in the second
paper (Part II). This was done with the aim of showcasing relevant plant data insights, and extract parameters
that should be targeted for plant design and performance optimisation. We identify several promising technol-
ogies that integrate well with existing mineral processing plants and testing laboratories to exploit the concept of
a dry laboratory, in order to enhance pre-existing mineral processing chains. It also sets the passage in terms of
the value of innovative analysis of existing and simulation data as part of the new world of data analytics. Using
data- and technology-driven initiatives, we propose the establishment of dry laboratories and data banks to
ultimately leverage integrated data, analytics and process simulation for effective plant design and improved
performance.

 

1. Introduction

The mineral processing value chain is complex and consists of several
different sequential processes and operations. Traditionally, these pro-
cesses and operations were conducted in gated stages, reflecting the
compartmentalised nature of the mining industry. This can potentially
complicate the plant optimisation process, as local optimisation in one
operation does not guarantee a universal solution to other sections of the
mineral processing value chain (Ding et al., 2017). This entails that if
each operation works independently (silo-approach), the optimisation

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: yousef.ghorbani@Itu.se (Y. Ghorbani).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mineng.2020.106646

of the whole value chain cannot be performed; there is a need for an
integrated approach to achieve mineral processing value chain-wide
optimisation.

The emergence of integrated approaches in mineral processing in-
dustries such as geometallurgy (Aasly and Ellefmo, 2014; Dominy et al.,
2018; Lishchuk et al., 2020; Lund et al., 2015) and process mineralogy
(Becker et al., 2016; Lotter, 2011) is largely based on breaking the silo-
approach to optimise the whole production process and discover new
synergies. Using an integrated approach, the optimisation of ore bene-
ficiation process can already be achieved in upstream processes through,

Received 28 June 2020; Received in revised form 29 August 2020; Accepted 20 September 2020

Available online 28 September 2020

0892-6875/© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Y. Ghorbani et al.

ce

for example in the approach known as “ mine-to-mill optimization”
blasting is controlled in mining to increase comminution efficiency (Chi
et al., 1996; Yu et al., 2011; Chai et al., 2014) or the ore blending
selectively is performed to produce favourable feed for the downstream
processes (Aasly and Ellefmo, 2014; Lund and Lamberg, 2014; Philander
and Rozendaal, 2014; Nwaila et al., 2019).

These approaches require good communication as well as access,
where historical and operational data can be easily utilised in each
optimisation stage of the production process. The availability of opera-
tional data across the whole plant is already a common practice in
chemical process industries (Marchetti et al., 2014). By continuously
updating the process data to reflect the current condition in the plant,
the process can be optimised in real-time, commonly referred to as Real-
Time Optimisation (RTO) (Taha and Rashid Khan, 2011). In such a
system, process parameters are continuously measured until a steady
state ‘is detected. When a steady state is achieved, the online process
model is updated to simulate the current plant operation. Process opti-
misation is then conducted using the updated model. New optimised
operating parameters are then obtained and implemented in the plant
through distributed control systems (DCS). This cycle can be repeated
again after the optimised operating parameters have been implemented
and the steady-state condition has been achieved. This process imple-
ments a feedback control system at an operating level.

The challenge in implementing such optimization procedures in
mineral processing plants is associated with the difficulty of establishing
quantitative process models that describe the operations (King, 2001).
The majority of models established in the mineral processing industry
are limited in their application to their respective case studies, as each
plant has its own unique features and raw materials. Moreover, Ding
et al. (2017) argued that in a single plant, process optimisation is often
only approached for a single unit operation; there are comparatively few
cases where global optimisation for the entire plant is achieved.

Furthermore, the development of digitalized, online plant-
monitoring systems for the mineral processing industry is generally
limited to that of online chemical analysis using X-ray Fluorescence
(XRF) (Nakhaei et al., 2012a). While such chemical analysis is useful, it
is often inadequate in explaining the complex mineralogy of the streams
and their interconnection with process behaviour, which drove further
development to mineralogical-based concept of geometallurgy and
process mineralogy in recent years. Development of geometallurgical
tools such as element to mineral conversion (Lund et al., 2013) are
mainly driven by the need of rapid acquisition of mineralogical infor-
mation in mineral processing plant operations, allowing access to new
types of data and additional insights to the process behaviour.

With respects to raw material and ore characterization, mineralogy
and rock textures are still largely qualitatively analysed by a trained
human operator using a petrographic microscopy and/or hand lens. This
poses challenges as it means that historical ore data is difficult to utilize
especially in modern data analytics and process simulation, much of
which needs quantitative data. With the rapid development of ore
characterization and tools such as X-ray Diffraction (XRD), Automated
Mineralogy, as well as 3D X-ray Computed Tomography (XCT) for
quantitative mineralogical and textural analysis of the ores, it is para-
mount to establish data banks to integrate highly quantitative data and
thereby maximising its value for simulation and optimisation of plant
performance.

This study is structured in two parts. In the first paper (Part 1), a
review of recent technological advances in the metallurgical discipline
covering the full-spectrum of the mineral processing value chain is
provided. Part I also examines the potential for the integration of
modern analytical technology with data analytics to create new process
optimisation opportunities. We assess the value of operational and

' Steady state here means that when the variable has approached the set
point value.

Minerals Engineering 159 (2020) 106646

legacy data in metallurgical plant for global production optimization
using an integrated and holistic approach through evaluation of plant
operational data, ore characteristics data, as well as legacy / historical
data from other sections involved in the production value chain, such as
mining, geology, and metallurgy. The availability of such data would
enable the shift to dry laboratory* environments as a future-oriented
approach, where the optimisation is performed with a model-based
simulation of the real-life operation, similar to that of RTO. The sec-
ond paper (Part 2) delves into two case studies, setting the scene in terms
of the value of novel just-in-time (low-latency and near real-time) data
analytics and simulation as part of the new world of technology-driven
mineral processing.

2. The value of legacy metallurgical data in the industry

Metallurgical operations globally generate large datasets (i.e. big
data) on a daily basis (McCoy and Auret, 2019). Technology firms such
as Amazon and Google leverages legacy and real-time data, including
big data by judicious applications of data-mining through artificial-
intelligence, machine-learning and deep-learning algorithms to gather,
process and transform data, and to automatically discover patterns and
extract insights. Such insights are used to drive business growth, market-
share and mindshare. In metallurgical plants, the situation pertaining to
the storage and use of data is decidedly less modern. A bulk of historical
and current plant operational data (“operational data’) are stored in
paper reports, digital spreadsheets and/or software systems, which are
then filed off for compliance purposes. Over the last few years, there has
been a proliferation of initiatives that employ various combinations of
equipment, data acquisition, and processing techniques, to improve
plant performance and metal recovery (Makokha and Moys, 2012;
Jahedsaravani et al., 2016, 2014; Massinaei and Doostmohammadi,
2010; Nakhaei et al., 2012b). The most successful solutions to date have
come from the deployment of online sensors and central monitoring
system (CMS), which collects real-time data that enables just-in-time
process visualisation and rapid management response (Jamsa-Jounela,
2019). Another area of analytics in mineral processing plants has
focused on predictive analytics for planned plant maintenance, which is
a technique that uses data to understand equipment degradation and
predict failures (Botha et al., 2018). However, numerous difficulties
have been encountered, even with these innovative data analytics ap-
proaches. Metallurgical data acquired in the actual processing plant
suffers from quality, quantity and consistency issues. Furthermore, in
some metallurgical operations, metallurgical accounting is combined
with metal accounting “and data is not collected at regular intervals,
thus creating additional challenges for analytics (Gaylard et al., 2009;
Ghorbani et al., 2020).

In a fast-evolving technological era, legacy metallurgical data is
often regarded by plant engineers as inferior compared with the newly
acquired, since technology itself drives rapid progress in in-situ moni-
toring instrumentation. In this context, the term “legacy data” refers to
metallurgical and metal accounting data stored in an old or obsolete
format, or in a manner that requires substantial data pre-processing and

2 A dry lab is a laboratory where computational or applied mathematical
analyses are done on a computer-generated model to simulate a phenomenon in
the physical realm.

3 Metallurgical accounting (primary accounting) refers to a system whereby
selected process data are collected from various sources across an entire process
and transformed into a coherent metallurgical report to meet specified opera-
tional and reporting requirements. Metallurgical accounting (secondary ac-
counting) refers to a system whereby selected process data (pertaining to metals
of economic interest) is collected from various sources including mass mea-
surement and analysis and transformed into a coherent report format that is
delivered in a timely fashion in order to meet specified reporting requirements
(Gaylard et al., 2009; Ghorbani et al., 2020).
Y. Ghorbani et al.

cleansing in preparation for data analytics. We use the terms “opera-
tional / current production data” interchangeably to refer to up-to-date
actual data from the production process. Routine operational data
contains valuable information regarding relationships between common
feed characteristics and performance indicators. Furthermore, these
relationships provide indirect knowledge of the structure and/or
composition of the feed sources, such that the resulting knowledge is
already appropriate to guide the optimisation of the operation. The
existing operational data that is generated on a daily basis could be
combined with automatable analytics to produce data-driven insights
and actionable knowledge to drive continuous improvement in plant
performance (Jahedsaravani et al., 2017). Therefore, operational data is
an essential mining asset that will only prove to be more valuable as the
industry transitions towards a data-rich and increasingly data-driven
type of operational feedback.

We propose the establishment of dry laboratories, a focus of which
would be on the analysis of legacy (and modern) data to extract
actionable knowledge that span several timescales. The short-term
knowledge can be leveraged to provide just-in-time feedback to exist-
ing processing plants and the long-term knowledge can be used to guide
the design and refinement of new plants. The new knowledge obtained
from legacy data may benefit future metallurgical operations by
providing better metrics to monitor and assess complex ore treatments
and enable cost reductions in the operation and design of metallurgical
plants. Successful applications of the above approach could enable
mineral processing engineers to rapidly design and refine processes
utilised within new and existing metallurgical plants, while providing a
foundation to enable processing plants to leverage a range of data an-
alytics algorithms that are on-par with those utilised by Amazon and
Google.

3. Driving factors moving towards dry laboratories and data
banks

3.1. Availability of the state of art characterisation tools

3.1.1. Automated mineralogy

It has been long realised that there exists a connection between the
mineralogy of a feed and its subsequent metallurgical performance
(Gaudin, 1939; Petruk, 1976). This is further advanced with the devel-
opment of sampling theory (Gy, 1979) as well as the concept of statis-
tical uncertainties entailed with the sampling procedures for particulate
materials. Subsequently, automated quantitative mineralogical analyses
together with the Scanning Electron Microscopy and Energy Dispersive
X-ray Spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) instruments were developed. Such in-
struments enable rapid and automated measurements of mineralogy,
particle morphology, as well as texture of ore samples (Fandrich et al.,
2007; Gottlieb et al., 2000; Gu et al., 2014; Sutherland, 2007; Sutherland
and Gottlieb, 1991). All of these developments ultimately form an in-
tegrated approach of process mineralogy (Becker et al., 2016; Lotter,
2011).

Many case studies demonstrated the use of integrated approaches for
optimisation of metallurgical and beneficiation processes. The use of
mineralogical information in mineral processing operations has been
studied by Lotter (2011) and Whiteman et al. (2016), with both studies
demonstrating the increase of metal recovery after incorporating
mineralogical and textural information in the flow sheeting and opti-
misation process. Other studies include, for example, utilisation of
mineralogical and textural information of iron ores to optimize the
subsequent downstream operations such as sintering and hydrocyclone
processes (Donskoi et al., 2016). Utilization of mineralogical informa-
tion can be extended as well to mine planning and ore body develop-
ment, in which the mineralogical information of the ore blocks can be
used to predict the processing behaviour of the block. The ore blocks can
then be classified into both geological and metallurgical types, thereby
adding information in the mine planning for maximizing the whole

Minerals Engineering 159 (2020) 106646

mine-to-mill value chain (Gottlieb, 2008).

It is, however, worth mentioning that automated mineralogy mea-
surements have some issues such as related to sampling and stereo-
logical errors (Latti and Adair, 2001; Ueda et al., 2016). Additionally,
while automated mineralogy provides many valuable information about
the sample, other methods such as quantitative XRD can provide greater
details about the gangue minerals (Parian et al., 2015) or SATMAGAN
analysis that can provide more details on the presence of magnetite
minerals (Lund et al., 2015).

The vast amount of data generated by automated mineralogical in-
struments necessitates the establishment of a data repository, to facili-
tate easy accessibility for various divisions in a mining operation.
Additionally, the establishment of a highly-structured and centralized
data repository, such as a data warehouse, would facilitate integrated
data and information intelligibility, increase confidence in analysis and
forecasting, improve data quality and deliver high-quality business in-
telligence. The establishment of a structured data repository with
rigorous data governance would enable the cross-correlation and vali-
dation of mineralogical data generated from various different analytical
tools, thereby potentially decreasing the statistical uncertainty in the
data and thus in the derived information. For example, there are a
couple of techniques available to minimize the statistical uncertainty
when using mineralogical information for mass balancing and modelling
purposes, typically by cross-correlating the mineralogical data to XRF
chemical analysis of the sample (Alves dos Santos and Galery, 2018;
Lamberg and Vianna, 2007).

The potential of the data repository could also be expanded to
include experimental databases. Database systems such as LIMS (Labo-
ratory Information Management System) which is traditionally used as a
means of managing assays analysis could potentially be extended to
include mineralogical analysis as well as metallurgical testing data.
Metallurgical laboratory testing is often necessary to correlate
mineralogy-to-process performance in a process-mineralogical approach
(Lotter, 2011). The reproducibility of laboratory tests is critical and the
ease of replication is desirable, such that the testing methodology is
maximally generalisable, as well as to validate the original experimental
results. This also allows for continuous improvements and updates of the
simulation to reflect ongoing changes in the plant. Combined with the
mineralogical data repository, process simulation could also be linked to
the input data, avoiding inconsistencies in the input parameters to
ensure reproducibility of the simulation. Similarly, mineralogy and
mineral liberation data obtained from automated mineralogy can be
used to model beneficiation processes such as flotation and magnetic
separation (Alves dos Santos, 2018; Lotter et al., 2003; Parian et al.,
2018, 2016) for process optimisation. The idea of the creation of an
experimental database has been coined by Perianayagam et al., (2010).
Such an idea was originally intended for software experiments, as
reconstructing such experiments are often problematic due to various
reasons, such as missing input libraries, compatibility issue with target
platform, and inconsistent command-line arguments. Nevertheless, such
a data repository is also relevant and applicable to data generated by
automated and manual instrumentation, and by extension, process
modelling and simulation.

3.1.2. X-ray tomography

Recent decades have shown promising progress for the use of 3D X-
ray Computed Tomography (XCT) for mineralogical characterisation.
XCT is a non-destructive technique that is capable of producing rapid 3D
mineralogical and spatial information of ore samples (Bam et al., 2016;
Ghorbani et al., 2011; Coshell et al., 1991). This is possible because the
technique registers the linear attenuation coefficient information of each
mineral present within the sample. The linear attenuation coefficient is
the sum of the scattering and absorption coefficients of a material, which
depend on the internal structure and density of the material and is often
unique for each mineral at a specific X-ray energy. In some cases where
minerals share similar linear attenuation coefficients at a specific X-ray
Y. Ghorbani et al.

energy, discrimination between the minerals can be affected. However,
for mineral processing, many common minerals are identifiable through
XCT, such as gold or platinum and sulphide mineral groups. Linear
attenuation coefficients for some common minerals such as native gold,
platinum, sulphide mineral groups (e.g., pyrite, chalcopyrite, and
galena) and silicate minerals (e.g., quartz) are shown in Fig. 1.

The differences in attenuation of various minerals are exploited in
XCT analysis for grade-data acquisition in order to preselect samples
with desirable amounts of a target mineral. The high linear attenuation
coefficient of a target mineral (e.g. gold) provide guidance in the se-
lection of optimal sample size and scanning parameters in order to
maximise scanning resolution and minimise the impact of beam hard-
ening. The combination of optimal sample size and scanning parameters
facilitates rapid data acquisition (Bam et al., 2016; 2019) and real-time
feedback.

It is worth mentioning that real-time feedback to the level employed
in the chemical industry requires high performance computers to enable
fast and automatic reconstruction of 3D images during scanning. The
reconstructed data with clear discrimination of target mineral grains can
be easily quantified and used to determine grain and particle size dis-
tributions (Evans et al., 2015; Le Roux et al., 2015; Rozendaal et al.,
2018), which are important for optimizing comminution and the
optimal feed grade. The 3D data can also be used for quantitative
textural analysis, which is especially relevant for automated drill core
recognition and classification (Guntoro et al., 2020a,b; Jardine et al.,
2018; Voigt et al., 2019).

XCT analysis could also be coupled with in-situ experiments such as
leaching (Dobson et al., 2017; Ghorbani et al., 2013a) and breakage tests
(Alikarami et al., 2015). The reconstructed data from in-situ leaching
tests can be further utilised to track mineral leaching progress (Fagan-
Endres et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2016; Ghorbani et al., 2013a) of various
mineral particles at different time intervals. A similar analysis could also
be adopted for in-situ breakage tests, which could provide crucial in-
formation on crack propagation in ore particles for breakage and
liberation modelling (Garcia et al., 2009; Xu et al., 2013; Ghorbani et al.,
2013b). These coupled in-situ XCT analyses could provide valuable

Minerals Engineering 159 (2020) 106646

time-series data of metallurgical tests, which could help in building
models for process optimisation.

Furthermore, XCT can also be utilised as a complimentary tool in ore
characterisation, especially with synchrotron sources. XCT-based com-
plimentary tools such as X-ray Diffraction Tomography (XRD-CT) and X-
ray Fluorescence Tomography (XRF-CT) have found applications for
analysis of geological materials (Artioli et al., 2010; Laforce et al., 2017;
Suuronen and Sayab, 2018; Takahashi and Sugiyama, 2019). Otherwise,
recent developments have also made possible the use of common labo-
ratory polychromatic-source XCT in different modes, such as diffraction-
contrast and phase-contrast modes, which could be useful for mineral
classification (King et al., 2014; Olivo and Castelli, 2014; Viermetz et al.,
2018).

XCT is an important tool and can add value to mineral processing for
its generation of large volumes of useful data that can be used in a dry
laboratory approach for process design. The graphic nature of raw XCT
data is also highly conducive to machine vision-based approaches to
classification and predictive analytics, such as improvements in particle
characterisation, phase discrimination and process modelling. Addi-
tionally, the developments of coupled analysis of various analytical tools
as well as in-situ experiments with XCT systems further enhance the
value of data generated from XCT systems. However, for application in
mining industries, the current laboratory XCT systems need to be
adapted in terms of design similarly to the ones used in the forest in-
dustry (Wei et al., 2011). This will allow a large number of samples to be
scanned simultaneously and large amounts of data to be generated
rapidly for continuous production optimisation.

3.1.3. Positron emission particle tracking

Positron emission particle tracking (PEPT) was developed at the
University of Birmingham (UK) to track the particle flow in dense and
opaque engineering systems (Hawkesworth et al., 1986; Parker et al.,
1993). A full description of PEPT is presented in Leadbeater (2009) and
Leadbeater et al. (2012). PEPT is based on tracking an individual par-
ticle tracer labelled with a positron-emitting radionuclide that decays by
positron emission (Parker et al., 1997). Each radioactive decay leads to

 

10000

1000 =

Linear Attenuation Coefficient (cm)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0

 

 

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240 250
X-ray Energy (keV)

—Gold —Platinum —Palladium ——Pyrite —Pyrrhotite —-Chalcopyrite —-Quartz —-Muscovite -

Biotite Chalcocite —Bornite

 

Fig. 1. Attenuation. Linear attenuation coefficients of various minerals. Clear differences are observed between high density minerals (e.g. gold, platinum), sulphide

minerals (e.g. pyrite, chalcopyrite), and silicate minerals (e.g. quartz, biotite).
Y. Ghorbani et al.

the emission of a positron, which quickly annihilates with an electron,
and nearly always creates a pair of gamma rays. They are emitted nearly
exactly back-to-back due to conservation of linear momentum, so that
simultaneous detection of both gamma rays provides a geometrical
constraint on the tracer’s position in the form of a line through a point in
close proximity to the tracer’s position at the time of positron emission.
A precise location can then be gained by triangulation of a small number
of such events. There are different methods to label particles’ direct
activation, ion exchange (Fan et al., 2006a) and surface modification
(Fan et al., 2006b). PEPT is the only existing technique capable of im-
aging complex flow, mixing and comminution (grinding) processes
within an opaque industrial equipment. Prior to PEPT, much of the
understanding and optimisation of industrial flow and mixing processes
were obtained through mathematical and computational models that
were impossible to directly validate. PEPT allows a paradigm shift in
process design and multi-scale modelling. Although PEPT might be a
useable technique for generating plant-related data in the near future, it
shows significant promise as a research tool in the mineral processing
industry (Table 1).

3.2. Digitalisation and Online-Monitoring systems

Data has always been the starting point of any mining operation and
mineral processing plant. Many mining operations and mineral pro-
cessing plants are currently using online sensors in their equipment for
process visualisation, quality management, process events and alerting
management (Kadlec et al., 2011; 2009; Lin et al., 2007; Janusz et al.,
2017; 2016; Souza et al., 2016). Acquisition of data is commonly
through a supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system and
monitored in a central monitoring system (CMS) or control room. Online
process analytics, supported by plant specific mass flow models, enable
accurate and timely reporting of metal balances. In addition, online
sensors can lead to: (a) optimised stockpile management and ore
blending; (b) improved milling performance and reagent use; and (c)
improved plant recovery (Mazzour et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2016;
Dindarloo and Siami-Irdemoosa, 2017). More recently, online reagent
analysers have been proven to produce measurements with accuracy
levels that are comparable to those obtained in a laboratory. Application
of online analysers include on-site applications near the point of sam-
pling, which provides results within a few minutes. This prevents long
holding times that make it difficult to accurately analyse substances for
their concentrations of reagents and metals in the laboratory. Moreover,
the near-instantaneous availability of the results means that process
plant operators are equipped to make swift decisions rather than being
forced to delay their operations for hours or days. The ability to carry out
continuous monitoring also means that the process allows the state of
the environment, as well as the mining operations, to be visualised on a
dynamic rather than a static, snapshot-like basis, as is the case when
grab sampling is used. This improves the reliability of metal accounting,
enables further process optimisation and early detection of anomalous
events in the process.

3.3. Smart Multi-filtering system to identify specific reagents

The rise of modern artificial-intelligence methods has the latent
potential to significantly change and boost the role of computers and
data in science and engineering (Yang et al., 2010). The combination of
big data and artificial intelligence (AI) has been referred to as the “fourth
paradigm of science” and the “fourth industrial revolution” (Schwab,
2015). Computational chemistry has become progressively predictive,
with a bustle in applications as wide-ranging as catalyst development,
materials discovery, and computer-assisted medicine design. High-
throughput computational screening has become _ ubiquitous,
providing scientists with the capability to compute the properties of
thousands of compounds as part of a single study. Chemicals are used in
nearly all the steps in mineral processing and extractive metallurgy, such

Minerals Engineering 159 (2020) 106646

as grinding (wet and dry grinding aids), flotation, hydrometallurgy,
solid—liquid separation, tailings treatment, and materials handling
(Prasad, 1992; Lewis, 1992; Hutton-Ashkenny et al., 2015). The use of
chemicals in the mining industry continues to grow in volume and
complexity as operators look to improve recovery and extraction tech-
niques and maximize yields from complex ores. As ores become more
challenging and process water becomes more impure, requirements
grow with respect to environmental and health protection, meaning that
more tailored and inventive chemical solutions will be needed.

Applying a smart tool with a multi-filtering system could help to
formalize a decision-making process framework dedicated to the sus-
tainable selection of reagents in an integrated scientific and industrial
context. It would help to identify mineral structure- and process-specific
reagents. Such a smart tool could be supported by data mining, which
discovers patterns in large datasets using methods such as artificial in-
telligence, machine learning, statistics, and database systems. This leads
to the integration of computational molecular structure and reagent
chemical interaction analysis with mineralogy, crystallography and/or
the physico-chemical condition of the relevant reactions in order to
identify the most effective reagents. This approach will certainly help
the mining industry to maximise the performance of their operations
through optimised reagent selection, superior application expertise, and
a constant stream of innovative products and technologies.

3.4. Data bank laboratory establishment

The entire history of natural resource exploitation is rich with data.
The operational and financial aspects of the mining industry alone have
necessitated the collection, analysis and storage of data. Data resulting
from the operational side of the business documents details of the op-
erations, such as characterisation of the ores at the bulk- and micro-
scales, tonnages processed, dates and worker shift productivity. Such
data is very useful for the evaluation of operational efficiency and to
identify any potential issues that lowers productivity and/or efficiency.
This type of information can be immediately turned into business in-
telligence and allows for process refinement and strategic business
planning.

However, there are several challenges in the mining industry
regarding data in context with modern data standards. Since competi-
tion forces private mining businesses to shelter their data, there is little
in terms of data standardisation across businesses. Therefore, data
quality dimensions, such as accuracy and precision, consistency and
completeness can be wholly missing outside of process-related quality
control and assurance. This is a major issue that requires an integrated
approach or standard to be taken across the mining industry, to at least
develop a rigorous standard that is usable across the industry. Such a
standard is unlikely to originate from a single business or company.

Another major issue is non-centralised storage of a variety of data.
Within only the operational-side of the mining industry, data is gener-
ated from analytical instruments, experiments, qualitative and quanti-
tative geology, geostatistics and plant operations. While there are clear
links between these areas, there is typically no centralized data re-
pository. Some advanced mining operations are moving towards data
warehousing or data lakes, but the bulk of operations in the industry
creates a large variety of data that are essentially siloed. This issue
complicates data analysis and makes tracking of business processes and
performance of each segment of the pipeline difficult and cumbersome.
Without a centralised store of at least partially structured data, an in-
tegrated, easy-to-use business intelligence tool would be impossible.

This paper does not propose a solution to an industry-wide problem
as this issue is monumental and requires the collective participation of
many private industries to solve. Instead, we observe that within the
laboratory setting, we can replicate many standard industrial processes
and source common materials for small-scale and highly reproducible
investigations that simulate various processes that exist within the
mining industry, such as gold extraction. This is a highly controlled
Y. Ghorbani et al.

Table 1
Application of positron emission particle tracking mineral processing units.

Minerals Engineering 159 (2020) 106646

Application _ Particle behaviour in mills Flow pattern of slurry in = Laboratory Hydrocyclones Flotation cells
a spiral concentrator batch jig
References Bbosa, et al., 2011; Kallon et al., 2011; Boucher et al., 2014; Roux and Chan et al., 2009; Fonnes, 2011; Chang et al., Waters et al.,
Jayasundara et al., 2011; Govender et al., 2013; Boucher et al., 2016; Naudé, 2014. 2011a,b; Chang et al., 2012; Chang and 2008; 2009

Morrison et al., 2016; Parker, 2017; de Klerk
et al., 2019

Boucher, 2017

environment where the data collected can be ensured in their quality
and management. Data collected within this environment can be used to
gain insights into the processes employed by the businesses and offer
low-cost, high-speed feedback to the businesses that is typical of labo-
ratory services, and allow evidence-based business intelligence to be
utilised at the business scale.

Broad and deep knowledge can be extracted from an abundance of
aggregated data and its implications on extraction and processing
pipeline design are profound. Such knowledge is generally impossible to
produce through siloed data from a single plant or simulation. Indeed,
we showcase knowledge generation from aggregated simulation data on
the second part (Part II) of this paper. Thus, it is important to aggregate
data from multiple sources in order to produce generalisable informa-
tion that transcends the boundaries of a particular ore, plant or business.
Aggregating data in the form of a data bank is an ideal approach.

The amount of non-public domain data that is essentially inacces-
sible outside of the industry is vast. This issue reflects the nature of
siloed operations typically conducted within the private industry sector.
With changes in the industry, including closures and personnel re-
placements, data is gradually lost or inadvertently destroyed, especially
on exhausted ores. This reinforces the notion of sound data governance
and the need for independent laboratories with a significant data gen-
eration and management component, such as dry laboratories, to ensure
that within the competitive private industry setting, important knowl-
edge that can provide a universal benefit is not lost due to the tragedy of
these above effects.

The dry lab approach does not aim to completely replace wet lab and
analytical laboratory test work. There is still a need for rigorous labo-
ratory work with a clear focus and goal to mend knowledge gaps that
would be otherwise unfeasible or undesirable to address at the plant
level. Laboratories’ can rapidly replicate plant processes to augment
existing data, explore nuances such as ore reaction kinetics that are
sometimes impossible to study at the plant level, and provide a neutral,
well-managed and data generation source of high quality, free of silos
and intended for knowledge production through data analytics. The
effective use of concepts driven by big data starts with recording the
right data. The Pareto principle states that a minimum number of key
variables can adequately describe any system and these are all that are
necessary in order to make a business decision such as the design and
configuration of a flotation plant and its revenue-generating capability.
In flotation, there are > 40 variables that affect the process in varying
degrees. Including all variables into a model unnecessarily complicates
analysis such that it becomes unusable to its users, as it becomes difficult
to establish direct and simple correlations between measured variables
and plant performance. These variables can be dimensionally reduced to
the extent that over 90% of flotation performance variability can be
accounted for by 8 kinetic parameters obtained from a laboratory rate
test (Fig. 2). Each kinetic parameter has a physical meaning in a pro-
duction plant and when incorporated into a model demonstrates the
same patterns of behaviour as the real system. The key to using a

* The laboratories here are mainly mean data exploration and modelling. Tt is
not included LIMS in its traditional meaning, which are essential operational
labs for analysing assays to establish product quality along with the mineral
processing plants. However, as described above the extended version of LIMS
could also significantly benefit from such an approach.

Hoffmann, 2015; Hoffmann et al., 2019

database effectively is the construction of a model that is simple and
effective and is only complex enough to meet these requirements.

4. Process simulation data and its application in dry labs

The potential application of dry laboratories in mineral processing
simulation is extensive, as the simulation could include not only oper-
ational and technical data, but also environmental data (Pell et al., 2019;
Segura-Salazar et al., 2019) and techno-economic data (Khalesi et al.,
2015). With the wide availability of supporting data for such simulation,
a holistic and integrated approach in optimizing mineral and metallur-
gical process simulation could be realized.

Process simulation data can be beneficial in the early stages of the
project, especially during commissioning and upscaling. Seppala et al.
(2014) demonstrated a combination of laboratory experimental works
as well as steady-state process-simulation data in commissioning a mini-
pilot scale flotation line. The pilot-scale flotation and its process simu-
lation were then used to study a full-scale flotation process of Pyhasalmi
mine (Veijola, 2014), which allows a detailed evaluation of various
operating parameters and their effect to the flotation process. Other
examples of upscaling projects with the aid of process simulation data
and laboratory works include the scaling up of vertical mill (Mazzinghy
et al., 2014). The vertical mill has been known to be more energy
effective than standard tube-ball mill, and the process simulation helped
to evaluate how the energy-efficiency of vertical mills scales with size.

The design practice of the mining and metallurgical industry is
typically separated between the technical and economic analysis, i.e. the
technical flowsheet development and feasibility study are done sepa-
rately (Khalesi et al., 2015). The ideal practice would be an integrated
process simulation and cost estimation approach using both technical
and economic constraints to achieve the best compromise between
performance and cost. Such practice is widespread in chemical engi-
neering industries, but it is comparatively rare in the mineral processing
industry. Decision-making in the early stages of the project can be
assisted using integrated process simulation that uses technical data as
well as cost variables, for example, the decision about the optimum
number of leaching tanks required has been found to be affected by the
interest rate (Khalesi et al., 2015), while the use of operational cost
variables can help in designing the capacity of flotation cells (Arfania
et al., 2017).

Furthermore, as the mining industry is constantly pushed towards a
more sustainable approach, the inclusion of environmental and Life
Cycle Analysis (LCA) in the process design stage are also inevitable. A
recent review (Segura-Salazar et al., 2019) has demonstrated that LCA
studies in mining operations is often separated from operational process
simulation. Such integration could be of great value especially in the
early stage of mining projects, where decision-making can have a big
impact on the mining operations and subsequently their environmental
impacts. While environmental improvements can be made during the
lifetime of a mining operation as more data becomes available (Pell
et al., 2019), the most potential improvement is in the early stages of the
project when different scenarios can be evaluated. Therefore, it is crit-
ical that process simulation must be integrated with LCA, such that
environmental impacts can be minimised with minimum interference to
the process performance. Examples of such approaches include choosing
a suitable energy source with respects to its reliability and global
Y. Ghorbani et al.

Mineral/rock association
Texture
Uni/binary/tertiary components

MINERALOGY a,

Geo-metallurgical considerations

Particle size
Particle size distribution PHYSICAL PARAMETERS
Degree of liberation
Froth recovery factor
Cell kW/m3
Efficency of mixing
article attachment

      

Bubble
Bubble

      
      
 

HYDRODYNAMIC
, ENVIRONMENT

; Bubble size
article detachmen

Bubble coalescence

Viscosity Pulp density

Air rate

  

Ig

   
 
     

Influences on Flotation
Performance

Minerals Engineering 159 (2020) 106646

Kinetics of metal/ mineral

KINETICS | Kinetics of floatable gangue

 

Kinetics of entrained material

Water recove H

Eh

CHEMICAL ENVIRONMENT! Amount of dissolved oxygen

\\. Water quality
Type of reagent
Quantity of reagent

Circuit conficuration

Cell e
Cell geometry

  
 
   
  

 

/ Short circuiting

Residence time

\\ Lip leneth to volume

\\ Pulp level
roth depth

Where to add reagents

 

OPERATION/DESIGN }

  
     

Fig. 2. Key influence parameters on floatation performance.

warming impact in rare earth elements (REE) processing plant (Pell
et al., 2019), evaluation of different processing routes for spodumene
beneficiation for lithium products applicable to electric vehicle batteries
(Oliazadeh et al., 2018), as well as optimizing iron ore blending stra-
tegies to increase the energy efficiency of the comminution circuits
while meeting product quality requirements (Mkurazhizha, 2018). In
addition, sustainable planning for mining projects should re-examine
the traditional maximisation of supply-chain efficiency to account for
a desirability for increased supply-chain robustness to survive global
disruptions in hindsight of the global COVID-19 pandemic.

5. Synchronised metallurgical plant data acquisition

The vast amount of data acquired routinely in a metallurgical plant
can contribute differently in optimising the performance of the whole
plant. Synchronized acquisition of these data in conjunction with a
databank or perhaps in some cases, a data warehouse establishment is
required to achieve global optimisation of the metallurgical plant. A
cloud-based platform for monitoring operational data of various unit
operations in a metallurgical plant has been proposed (Xu et al., 2018).
This platform allows real-time data collection for continuous optimiza-
tion and troubleshooting of the plant. Such a platform could also be
integrated with other business information systems, such as enterprise
resource planning (logistics, warehousing, and inventory management)
as well as planning and scheduling (Spackova et al., 2019).

Synchronised acquisition of plant data can also be useful for pre-
dictive maintenance in metallurgical plants, which seeks to predict
points and modes of failure and promotes proactive maintenance (Fer-
nandes et al., 2018). Predictive maintenance has become more popular
compared to traditional corrective maintenance, which failures are
detected and diagnosed, and thereafter reactively corrected (Mobley,
2002). Combined with a big-data approach, predictive maintenance
could be used not only for failure diagnosis but also to suggest a possible
course of action that could further optimise the plant’s existing process
in terms of performance, reliability and energy consumption.

The use of metallurgical plant data for process simulation as well as
metal accounting often requires data reconciliation to improve the data
accuracy and reduce error proliferation (e.g. through dependence and
derivation) in the acquired data. Data reconciliation in some metallur-
gical plants is difficult when metal content in the ore is very low and

heterogeneously distributed in the plants, as cases with gold processing
plants (de Andrade Lima, 2006). In such cases, the use of thermody-
namic as well as mass and energy balance constrains in the data
reconciliation process is required, such that the acquired plant data is
suitable for process simulation and optimization as illustrated in Fig. 3.

Furthermore, the understanding of what constitutes as operational
data has also become widened over the years, as data acquisition tech-
niques becomes more modernized and varied. Image data acquisition
using machine vision technology has been growing over the last decades
and has found application in mineral processing and metallurgical
plants. Applications of machine vision in ore sorting and grade estima-
tion (Perez et al., 2011; Tessier et al., 2007), froth texture analysis
(Kistner et al., 2013), online particle-size analysis (Ko and Shang, 2011),
as well as quality control of steel surfaces (Bharati et al., 2004) are
known. Most of these researchers devoted their work in the feature
extraction of image data for a wide range of applications in mineral
processing and metallurgical plants. However, latest deep-learning
techniques that makes autonomous driving possible have yet to be
incorporated into mineral processing, although the underlying tech-
niques should adapt well to online monitoring systems with highly vi-
sual data (e.g. XCT and PEPT). A detailed discussion have been provided
at Section 3.1 (Data-based modelling in minerals processing) in the
latest review paper on Machine learning applications in minerals pro-
cessing by McCoy and Auret (2019).

All of the approaches described herein detailed how data acquisition,
processing, and reconciliation is the first key step in achieving optimised
plant performance. The value of the data acquired from different sec-
tions of the plant can be maximised with robust process simulation in a
dry lab environment, thereby creating an integrated approach in global
optimisation of plant performance leveraging known and emerging
technological developments.

6. Summary and outlook

Technological evolutions in the mineral processing industry
including the use of automated mineralogy techniques, best-reagent
mixtures and data analytics have the potential to provide key process
insights, thus enabling effective plant design and performance optimi-
sation. Common to all these exciting developments is the reliance and /
or generation of data. An adequately integrated approach consisting of
Y. Ghorbani et al.

1 | Analytical and measurement errors

I | Acquisition and sampling errors

Acquisition

Minerals Engineering 159 (2020) 106646

Metal Accounting

Reconciliation

 

1 | Mass balance constrains
I

1
I

1} Thermodynamicand energy | I
; conservation constrains I

Fig. 3. Use of constrains to minimize errors in data reconciliation process for metal accounting.

existing and new technologies that adopts a solid data pipeline from
generation to analytics can enable timelier (e.g. just-in-time), more ac-
curate and diverse feedback relative to the current state. Therefore, the
data pipeline and the adequacy of its integration will likely become
crucial factors controlling the outcome of the adoption of the 4th in-
dustrial revolution concepts in the mineral processing industry. The
mineral processing industry is universally limited by modern economic
margins and impacted by increasingly mineralogically complex ores,
which necessitate increasingly optimised and adaptable plant processes.
Optimisation of plant processes should be built on a baseline foundation
of detailed historical findings that are generalisable and dependable,
and further customized and adapted dynamically at the operation level
by insights derived through analytics from operational and laboratory
data.

Together, operational and historical data covers a range from
detailed to large-scaled plant data. These types of data can be considered
to be the end-members of a spectrum of data, in the sense that opera-
tional data captures the short-term reality and can provide timely
feedback to the operation, and historical data is a much more statisti-
cally robust and broad overview of many operations. In each case, the
theme of the data pipeline remains central. While we do not introduce
any advanced or new analytics algorithms or truly big data, both oper-
ational and historic data have the capacity to employ the former and
become the latter.

With the widespread adoption of online digitised monitoring, smart
multi-filtering systems, and the development of information technology
infrastructure within the plant environment, in-house data pipeline
development is well within the reach of large metallurgical processing
plants. Jointly with this in-house expansion on data capabilities,
rigorous control practices and management must be placed on data
governance, and particularly data quality and literacy.

At smaller plants, process simulations in independent dry labora-
tories and scaling tests are highly vital to generate data, replicate pro-
cesses and closely examine the data from metallurgical, analytics and
industrial design perspectives. In addition, since legacy data predates
modern data concepts, the examination of such data requires specific
subject matter experts with an inside knowledge of the inner workings of
the data. The value of legacy data is wholly dependent on the avail-
ability of subject matter expertise.

With the 4th industrial revolution, a proper data governance struc-
ture should coexist with rigorous data management, which embeds the
value of data into master data, reference data, metadata and other
various structures that are much more tolerant of expertise

perturbances, including personnel changes. This highlights the imme-
diate and pervasive need to migrate away from historic concepts of data
ownership and expertise around a subject matter towards a modern
implementation of data governance. Any integrated approach that in-
tends to leverage data, and particularly multi-sourced data to optimise
mineral processing should take into strong consideration the effects of a
proper data governance structure and a sound data pipeline. This en-
sures that the integration is natural, holistic and modern, and that the
data generated at each stage is cross-compatible, self-explanatory,
optimally used and reused. However, in contrast to changes in tech-
nology and increases in data generation, corresponding changes in
culture are much slower. Data governance, among other changes
brought forth by the 4th industrial revolution requires operational,
tactical, management and strategic cultural changes and should begin
with a vision and strategy at the executive level. Implementation of such
a strategy, including investment in cultural changes, such as provisions
for training, education, employee outreach, talent recruitment and
retention should coincide with technological changes. The final goal is
to derive better business outcomes using technology and data, and build
a company culture that promotes discovery and innovation through the
adoption and utilisation of both technology and data.

In summary, we propose a holistic and transformative approach,
aiming to standardise, automate and evolve the decision-making feed-
back loop within plants. To accomplish this, a plant would need to
establish or enhance online digitised monitoring capabilities, and
incorporate technologies that promote automation, such as XCT and
PEPT, which are all data-laden and integrate well within the typical
current plant operation. However, these techniques are often costly to
acquire, maintain and operate, prohibitively so for smaller or low-profit
operations, and their integration within a separate independent labo-
ratory is probably a better approach. For all businesses of all sizes,
specialised dry laboratories seem unavoidable.

With the increased data generation and analytics deployment, a well-
established data bank or warehouse becomes a business necessity. Even
for the independent laboratory, a proper data bank is essential. Once this
approach has been adopted, all pillars of the 4th industrial revolution
that depends on an abundance of quality and timely data can be realised.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Y. Ghorbani et al.

Acknowledgements

We thank Julie E. Bourdeau for help with pre-submission critical
comments and editing of this paper.

Additional information

Supplementary material is available in the online version of the
paper.

References

Aasly, K., Ellefmo, S., 2014. Geometallurgy applied to industrial minerals operations.
Mineralproduksjon 5, 21-34.

Alikarami, R., Ando, E., Gkiousas-Kapnisis, M., Torabi, A., Viggiani, G., 2015. Strain
localisation and grain breakage in sand under shearing at high mean stress: insights
from in situ X-ray tomography. Acta Geotech. 10, 15-30.

Alves dos Santos, N., 2018. Modelling flotation per size liberation class — Part 3 —
Modelling recoveries using particle surface area. Miner. Eng. 129, 15-23.

Alves dos Santos, N., Galery, R., 2018. Modelling flotation per size liberation class — Part
2 — Evaluating flotation per class. Miner. Eng. 129, 24-36.

Arfania, S., Sayadi, A.R., Khalesi, M.R., 2017. Cost modelling for flotation machines.

J. South. African Inst. Min. Metall. 117, 89-96.

Artioli, G., Cerulli, T., Cruciani, G., Dalconi, M.C., Ferrari, G., Parisatto, M., Rack, A.,
Tucoulou, R., 2010. X-ray diffraction microtomography (XRD-CT), a novel tool for
non-invasive mapping of phase development in cement materials. Anal. Bioanal.
Chem. 397, 2131-2136.

Bam, L., Miller, J., Becker, M., de Beer, F., Basson, I., 2016. X-ray Computed Tomography
— Determination of Rapid Scanning Parameters for Geometallurgical Analysis of Iron
Ore.

Bam, L.C., Miller, J.A., Becker, M., Basson, I.J., 2019. X-ray computed tomography:
Practical evaluation of beam hardening in iron ore samples. Miner. Eng. 131,
206-215.

Bbosa, L., Govender, I., Mainza, A., Powell, M., 2011. Power draw estimations in
experimental tumbling mills using pept. Min. Eng. 24, 319-324.

Becker, M., Wightman, E.M., Evans, E., 2016. Process Mineralogy. JKMRC monograph
series in mining and mineral processing, Brisbane, Australia.

Bharati, M.H., Liu, J.J., MacGregor, J.F., 2004. Image texture analysis: methods and
comparisons. Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst. 72, 57-71.

Botha, S., le Roux, J.D., Craig, I.K., 2018. Hybrid nonlinear model predictive control of a
run-of-mine ore grinding mill circuit. Miner. Eng. 123, 49-62.

Boucher, D., 2017. Observation of iron ore particle flow in a Mineral spiral concentrator
by positron emission Particle tracking (PEPT), A thesis submitted to McGill
University in partial fulfilment of the requirements of the degree of Doctor of
Philosophy at the Department of Mining. and Materials Engineering-McGill
University.

Boucher, D., Deng, Z., Leadbeater, T., Langlois, R., Renaud, M., Waters, K.E., 2014. PEPT
studies of heavy particle flow within a spiral concentrator. Miner. Eng. 62, 120-128.

Boucher, D., Deng, Z., Leadbeater, T., Langlois, R., Waters, K.E., 2016. Observation of
iron ore beneficiation within a spiral concentrator by positron emission particle
tracking of large (O=1440 lm) and small (O@=58 Im) hematite and quartz tracers.
Chem. Engr. Sci. 140, 217-232.

Chai, T., Ding, J., Yu, G., Wang, H., 2014. Integrated optimisation for the automation
systems of mineral processing. IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng. 11, 965-982.

Chan, C.W., Seville, J., Fan, X., Baeyens, J., 2009. Particle motion in CFB cyclones as
observed by positron emission particle tracking. Industr. Eng. Chem. Res. 48,
253-261.

Chang, Y.-F., Hoffmann, A.C., 2015. A Lagrangian study of liquid flow in a reverse-flow
hydrocyclone using positron emission particle tracking. Exp. Fluids 56 (4), 1-14.

Chang, Y.-F., Pisarev, G.I., Hoffmann, A.C., 2011a. Numerical study of the “end of the
vortex” phenomenon in a hydrocyclone separator. AIP Conf. Proc. 1389, 181-186.

Chang, Y.F., Ilea, C.G., Aasen, O.L., Hoffmann, A.C., 2011b. Particle flow in a
hydrocyclone investigated by positron emission particle tracking. Chem. Eng. Sci.
66, 4203-4211.

Chang, Y.-F., Skorpen, A., Fonnes, D., Hoffmann, A.C., 2012. Detecting anomalies in the
separation process in a hydrocyclone using a medical PET scanner. In: Proceedings of
the 6th International Symposium on Process Tomography, Cape Town, South Africa.

Chi, G., Fuerstenau, M.C., Bradt, R.C., Ghosh, A., 1996. Improved comminution
efficiency through controlled blasting during mining. Int. J. Miner. Process. 47,
93-101.

Coshell, L., Scott, J., Knights, A.M., Evans, B.J., Hill, M.W., 1991. Non-destructive Core
Analysis Using X-ray Computed Tomography. Explor. Geophys. 22, 71-74.

de Andrade Lima, L.R.P., 2006. Nonlinear data reconciliation in gold processing plants.
Miner. Eng. 19, 938-951.

de Klerk, D.N., Govender, I. b, Mainza, A.N., 2019. Geometric features of tumbling mill
flows: A positron emission particle tracking investigation, Chemical Engineering
Science, 206, 41-49.

Dindarloo, S.R., Siami-Irdemoosa, E., 2017. Data mining in mining engineering: results of
classification and clustering of shovels failures data. Int. J. Mining Reclam. Environ.
31, 105-118. https://doi.org/10.1080/17480930.2015.1123599.

Ding, J., Yang, C., Chai, T., 2017. Recent Progress on Data-Based Optimisation for
Mineral Processing Plants. Engineering 3, 183-187.

Minerals Engineering 159 (2020) 106646

Dobson, J.K., Harrison, T.S., Lin, Q., Ni Bhreasail, A., Fagan-Endres, A.M., Neethling, J.
S., Lee, D.P., Cilliers, J.J., 2017. Insights into Ferric Leaching of Low Grade Metal
Sulfide-Containing ores in an Unsaturated Ore Bed Using X-ray Computed
Tomography. Minerals 7.

Dominy, S., O’Connor, L., Parbhakar-Fox, A., Glass, H., Purevgerel, S., 2018.
Geometallurgy—A Route to More Resilient Mine Operations. Minerals 8, 560.
Donskoi, E., Poliakov, A., Holmes, R., Suthers, S., Ware, N., Manuel, J., Clout, J., 2016.
Iron ore textural information is the key for prediction of downstream process

performance. Miner. Eng. 86, 10-23.

Evans, C.L., Wightman, E.M., Yuan, X., 2015. Quantifying mineral grain size
distributions for process modelling using X-ray micro-tomography. Miner. Eng. 82,
78-83.

Fagan-Endres, M.A., Cilliers, J.J., Sederman, A.J., Harrison, S.T.L., 2017. Spatial
variations in leaching of a low-grade, low-porosity chalcopyrite ore identified using
X-ray wCT. Miner. Eng. 105, 63-68.

Fan, X., Parker, D.J., Smith, M.D., 2006a. Enhancing 18F uptake in a single particle for
positron emission particle tracking through modification of solid surface chemistry.
Nuclear Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res. Sec. A Accelerat. Spectrometers Detect. Associated
Equip. 558 (2), 542-546.

Fan, X., Parker, D.J., Smith, M.D., 2006b. Labelling a single particle for positron emission
particle tracking using direct activation and ion-exchange techniques. Nuclear
Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res. Sec. A Accelerat. Spectrometers Detect. Associated Equip.
562 (1), 345-350.

Fandrich, R., Gu, Y., Burrows, D., Moeller, K., 2007. Modern SEM-based mineral
liberation analysis. Int. J. Miner. Process. 84, 310-320.

Fernandes, M., Canito, A., Bolon, V., Conceicao, L., Praca, I., Marreiros, G., 2018.
Predictive Maintenance in the Metallurgical Industry: Data Analysis and Feature
Selection BT - Trends and Advances in Information Systems and Technologies, in:
Rocha, A., Adeli, H., Reis, L.P., Costanzo, S. (Eds.), . Springer International
Publishing, Cham, pp. 478-489.

Fonnes, D.G. 2011. Investigation of particle trajectories in hydrocyclones using positron
emission tomography and numerical simulations.

Garcia, D., Lin, C.L., Miller, J.D., 2009. Quantitative analysis of grain boundary fracture
in the breakage of single multiphase particles using X-ray microtomography
procedures. Miner. Eng. 22, 236-243.

Gaudin, A.M., 1939. Principles of mineral dressing. McGraw-Hill, New York.

Gaylard, P.G., Morrison, R.D., Randolph, N.G. Wortley, C.M.G., Beck, R. D., 2009.
Extending the application of the AMIRA P754 code of practice for metal accounting.
Proceedings of the 5th Base Metals Conference, 15-38. Kasane, Chobe, Botswana:
Southern African Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, Johannesburg, 27-31 July
2009.

Ghorbani, Y., Becker, M., Petersen, J., Mora, S.H., Mainza, A., Franzidis, J.-P., 2011. Use
of X-ray computed tomography to investigate crack distribution and mineral
dissemination in sphalerite ore particles. Miner. Eng. 24, 1249-1257.

Ghorbani, Y., Petersen, J., Becker, M., Mainza, A.N., Franzidis, J.-P., 2013a. Investigation
and modelling of the progression of zinc leaching from large sphalerite ore particles.
Hydrometallurgy 131-132, 8-23.

Ghorbani, Y., Mainza, A.N., Petersen, J., Becker, M., Franzidis, J.-P., Kalala, J.T., 2013b.
Investigation of particles with high crack density produced by HPGR and its effect on
the redistribution of the particle size fraction. Miner. Eng. 43-44, 44-51.

Ghorbani, Y., Nwaila, G.T., Chrisa, M., 2020. Systematic framework toward a highly
reliable approach in metal accounting. Miner. Process. Extr. Metall. Rev. https://doi.
org/10.1080/08827508.2020.1784164.

Gottlieb, P., Wilkie, G., Sutherland, D., Ho-Tun, E., Suthers, S., Perera, K., Jenkins, B.,
Spencer, S., Butcher, A., Rayner, J., 2000. Using quantitative electron microscopy for
process mineralogy applications. JOM 52, 24-25,

Govender, I., Cleary, P.W., Mainza, A.N., 2013. Comparisons of PEPT derived charge
features in wet milling environments with a friction-adjusted DEM model. Chem.
Eng. Sci. 97, 162-175.

Gu, Y., Schouwstra, R.P., Rule, C., 2014. The value of automated mineralogy. Miner. Eng.
58, 100-103.

Gottlieb, P., 2008. The revolutionary impact of automated mineralogy on mining and
mineral processing. In: Wang, D.Z., Sun, C.Y., Wang, F.L., Zhang, L.C., Hang, L.
(Eds.), 24th International Mineral Processing Congress. Science Press, Beijing,
pp. 165-174.

Guntoro, P.I., Ghorbani, Y., Butcher, A.R., Kuva, J., Rosenkranz, J., 2020a. Textural
Quantification and Classification of Drill Cores for Geometallurgy: Moving Toward
3D with X-ray Microcomputed Tomography (uCT). Nat. Resour. Res.

Guntoro, P.I., Ghorbani, Y., Rosenkranz, J., 2020. Ore Texture Analysis: Moving Towards
3D with X-ray Microcomputed Tomography (uCT), in: Conference in Minerals
Engineering. Lulea, Sweden.

Gy, P., 1979. Sampling of particulate materials theory and practice. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

Hawkesworth, M.R., O’Dwyer, M., Walker, J., Fowles, P., Heritage, J., Stewart, P.,
Witcomb, R., Bateman, J., Connolly, J., Stephenson, R., 1986. A positron camera for
industrial application. Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 253, 145-157.

Hoffmann, A.C., Skorpen, A, Chang, Y.-F., 2019. Positron emission particle tracking and
CFD investigation of hydrocyclones acting on liquids of varying viscosity. Chem.
Eng. Sci. 200 (2019), 310-319.

Hutton-Ashkenny, M., Ibana, D., Barnard, K.R., 2015. Reagent selection for recovery of
nickel and cobalt from nitric acid nickel laterite leach solutions by solvent
extraction. Miner. Eng. 77, 42-51.

Jahedsaravani, A., Marhaban, M.H., Massinaei, M., 2014. Prediction of the metallurgical
performances of a batch flotation system by image analysis and neural networks.
Miner. Eng. 69, 137-145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mineng.2014.08.003.
Y. Ghorbani et al.

Jahedsaravani, A., Marhaban, M.H., Massinaei, M., Saripan, M.I., Noor, S.B.M., 2016.
Froth-based modeling and control of a batch flotation process. Int. J. Miner. Process.
146, 90-96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.minpro.2015.12.002.

Jahedsaravani, A., Massinaei, M., Marhaban, M.H., 2017. Development of a machine
vision system for real-time monitoring and control of batch flotation process. Int. J.
Miner. Process. 167, 16-26. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MINPRO.2017.07.011.

Jamsa-Jounela, S.-L., 2019. Future Automation Systems in Context of Process Systems
and Minerals Engineering. IFAC-PapersOnLine 52 (25), 403-408.

Janusz, A., Grzegorowski, M., Michalak, M., Wrobel, £., Sikora, M., Slezak, D., 2017.
Predicting seismic events in coal mines based on underground sensor measurements.
Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 64, 83-94. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENGAPPAI.2017.06.
002.

Janusz, A., Slezak, D., Sikora, M., Wrobel, L., 2016. Predicting dangerous seismic events:
AAIA’16 Data Mining Challenge. In: Federated Conference on Computer Science and
Information Systems (FedCSIS). IEEE, Gdansk, pp. 205-211. https://doi.org/10.
15439/2016F560.

Jardine, M.A., Miller, J.A., Becker, M., 2018. Coupled X-ray computed tomography and
grey level co-occurrence matrices as a method for quantification of mineralogy and
texture in 3D. Comput. Geosci. 111, 105-117.

Jayasundara, C.T., Yang, R.Y., Guo, B.Y., Yu, A.B., Govender, I., Mainza, A., van der
Westhuizen, A., Rubenstein, J., 2011. CFD-DEM modeling of particle flow in
IsaMills—comparison between simulations and PEPT measurements. Miner. Eng. 24,
181-187.

Kadlec, P., Gabrys, B., Strandt, S., 2009. Data-driven soft sensors in the process industry.
Comput. Chem. Eng. 33, 795-814. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2008.
12.012.

Kadlec, P., Grbic¢, R., Gabrys, B., 2011. Review of adaptation mechanisms for data-driven
soft sensors. Comput. Chem. Eng. 35, 1-24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compchemeng.2010.07.034.

Kallon, D.V.V., Govender, I., Mainza, A.N., 2011. Circulation rate modelling of mill
charge using position emission particle tracking. Miner. Eng. 24, 282-289.

Khalesi, M.R., Zarei, M.J., Sayadi, A.R., Khoshnam, F., Hemmati Chegeni, M., 2015.
Development of a techno-economic simulation tool for an improved mineral
processing plant design. Miner. Eng. 81, 103-108.

King, A., Reischig, P., Adrien, J., Peetermans, S., Ludwig, W., 2014. Polychromatic
diffraction contrast tomography. Mater. Charact. 97, 1-10.

King, R.P., 2001. Modeling and simulation of mineral processing systems. Elsevier.

Kistner, M., Jemwa, G.T., Aldrich, C., 2013. Monitoring of mineral processing systems by
using textural image analysis. Miner. Eng. 52, 169-177.

Ko, Y.-D., Shang, H., 2011. A neural network-based soft sensor for particle size
distribution using image analysis. Powder Technol. 212, 359-366.

Laforce, B., Masschaele, B., Boone, M.N., Schaubroeck, D., Dierick, M., Vekemans, B.,
Walgraeve, C., Janssen, C., Cnudde, V., Van Hoorebeke, L., Vincze, L., 2017.
Integrated Three-Dimensional Microanalysis Combining X-Ray Microtomography
and X-Ray Fluorescence Methodologies. Anal. Chem. 89, 10617-10624.

Lamberg, Vianna, S.M.S., 2007. A technique for tracking multiphase mineral particles in
flotation circuits. In: C.A. Lima, R.M.F. Ladeira, A.C.Q. Da Silva et al. (Eds.), VII
Meeting of the Southern Hemisphere on Mineral Technology, vol. I, pp. 195-202.
Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto.

Le Roux, S.G., Du Plessis, A., Rozendaal, A., 2015. The quantitative analysis of tungsten
ore using X-ray microCT: Case study. Comput. Geosci. 85, 75-80.

Leadbeater, T.W., 2009. The Development of Positron Imaging Systems for Applications
in Industrial Process Tomography. In: School of Physics & Astronomy. University of
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK, p. 168.

Leadbeater, T.W., Parker, D.J., Gargiuli, J., 2012. Positron imaging systems for studying
particulate, granular and multiphase flows. Particuology 10 (2), 146-153.

Lewis, K.A., 1992. SOLVEX: A database for the selection and appraisal of solvent
extraction reagents. Miner. Eng. 5, 513-520.

Lin, B., Recke, B., Knudsen, J.K.H., Jorgensen, S.B., 2007. A systematic approach for soft
sensor development. Comput. Chem. Eng. 31, 419-425. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
COMPCHEMENG.2006.05.030.

Lin, Q., Barker, D.J., Dobson, K.J., Lee, P.D., Neethling, S.J., 2016. Modelling particle
scale leach kinetics based on X-ray computed micro-tomography images.
Hydrometallurgy 162, 25-36.

Lishchuk, V., Koch, P.-H., Ghorbani, Y., Butcher, A.R., 2020. Towards integrated
geometallurgical approach: Critical review of current practices and future trends.
Miner. Eng. 145, 106072.

Lotter, N., Kowal, D., Tuzun, M., Whittaker, P., Kormos, L., 2003. Sampling and flotation
testing of Sudbury Basin drill core for process mineralogy modelling. Miner. Eng. 16,
857-864.

Lotter, N.O., 2011. Modern Process Mineralogy: An integrated multi-disciplined
approach to flowsheeting. Miner. Eng. 24, 1229-1237.

Latti, D., Adair, B.J.I., 2001. An assessment of stereological adjustment procedures.
Miner. Eng. 14, 1579-1587. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0892-6875(01)00176-5.
Lund, C., Lamberg, P., 2014. Geometallurgy—A tool for better resource efficiency. Eur.

Geol. Mag. 37, 39-43.

Lund, C., Lamberg, P., Lindberg, T., 2013. Practical way to quantify minerals from
chemical assays at Malmberget iron ore operations — An important tool for the
geometallurgical program. Miner. Eng. 49, 7-16.

Lund, C., Lamberg, P., Lindberg, T., 2015. Development of a geometallurgical framework
to quantify mineral textures for process prediction. Miner. Eng. 82, 61-77.

Makokha, A.B., Moys, M.H., 2012. Multivariate approach to on-line prediction of in-mill
slurry density and ball load volume based on direct ball and slurry sensor data.
Miner. Eng. 26, 13-23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mineng.2011.10.009.

10

Minerals Engineering 159 (2020) 106646

Mazzour, E.H., Hodouin, D., Makni, S., 2003. Optimal sensor implementation in
metallurgical plants—an application to a generic mineral separation plant. Int. J.
Miner. Process. 69, 185-203. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0301-7516(02)001 23-0.

McCoy, J.T., Auret, L., 2019. Machine learning applications in minerals processing: A
review. Miner. Eng. 132, 95-109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mineng.2018.12.004.

Massinaei, M., Doostmohammadi, R., 2010. Modeling of bubble surface area flux in an
industrial rougher column using artificial neural network and statistical techniques.
Miner. Eng. 23, 83-90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mineng.2009.10.005.

Marchetti, A.G., Ferramosca, A., Gonzalez, A.H., 2014. Steady-state target optimisation
designs for integrating real-time optimisation and model predictive control.

J. Process Control 24, 129-145.

Mazzinghy, D.B., Galéry, R., Schneider, C.L., Alves, V.K., 2014. Scale up and simulation
of VertimillTM pilot test operated with copper ore. J. Mater. Res. Technol. 3, 86-89.

Mkurazhizha, H., 2018. The effects of ore blending on comminution behaviour and
product quality in a grinding circuit-Svappavaara (LKAB) Case Study.

Mobley, R.K., 2002. 6 - Predictive Maintenance Techniques, in: Mobley, R.K.B.T.-A.I. to
P.M. (Second E. (Ed.), Plant Engineering. Butterworth-Heinemann, Burlington, pp.
99-113.

Morrison, A., Govender, I., Mainza, A., Parker, D., 2016. The shape and behaviour of a
granular bed in a rotating drum using eulerian ow elds obtained from pept. Chem.
Eng. Sci. 152, 186-198.

Nakhaei, F., Sam, A., Mosavi, M.R., Nakhaei, A., 2012a. Prediction of XRF analyzers error
for elements on-line assaying using Kalman Filter. Int. J. Min. Sci. Technol. 22,
595-601.

Nakhaei, F., Mosavi, M.R., Sam, A., Vaghei, Y., 2012b. Recovery and grade accurate
prediction of pilot plant flotation column concentrate: neural network and statistical
techniques. Int. J. Miner. Process. 110, 140-154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.minpro.
2012.03.003.

Nwaila, G.T., Ghorbani, Y., Becker, M., Frimmel, H.E., Petersen, J., Zhang, S., 2019.
Geometallurgical approach for implications of ore blending on cyanide leaching and
adsorption behaviour of Witwatersrand gold ores, South Africa. Nat. Resour. Res.
1-24.

Oliazadeh, M., Aghamirian, M., Ali, S., Legault, E., Gibson, C., 2018. Flowsheet
Development for Beneficiation of Lithium Minerals from Hard Rock Deposits, in:
Extraction 2018. Springer, pp. 2293-2307.

Olivo, A., Castelli, E., 2014. X-ray phase contrast imaging: From synchrotrons to
conventional sources. Riv. del Nuovo Cim. 37, 467-508.

Parian, M., Lamberg, P., Mockel, R., Rosenkranz, J., 2015. Analysis of mineral grades for
geometallurgy: Combined element-to-mineral conversion and quantitative X-ray
diffraction. Miner. Eng. 82, 25-35.

Parian, M., Lamberg, P., Rosenkranz, J., 2016. Developing a particle-based process
model for unit operations of mineral processing - WLIMS. Int. J. Miner. Process. 154,
53-65.

Parian, M., Lamberg, P., Rosenkranz, J., 2018. Process simulations in mineralogy-based
geometallurgy of iron ores. Miner. Process. Extr. Metall. 1-6.

Parker, D.J., Allen, D.A., Benton, D.M., Fowles, P., McNeil, P.A., Tan, M., Beynan, T.D.,
1997. Developments in particle tracking using the Birmingham positron camera.
Nuclear instruments and methods in physics research section A: Accelerometers,
spectrometers, detectors and associated equipment 392, 421-426.

Parker, D.J., 2017. Positron emission particle tracking and its application to granular
media. Rev. Sci. Intr. 88 (051803), 1-8.

Parker, D.J., Broadbent, C.J., Fowles, P., Hawkesworth, M.R., McNeil, P., 1993. Positron
emission particle tracking - a technique for studying flow within engineering
equipment. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A 326 (3), 592-607.

Pell, R., Wall, F., Yan, X., Li, J., Zeng, X., 2019. Mineral processing simulation based-
environmental life cycle assessment for rare earth project development: A case study
on the Songwe Hill project. J. Environ. Manage. 249, 109353.

Perez, C.A., Estévez, P.A., Vera, P.A., Castillo, L.E., Aravena, C.M., Schulz, D.A., Medina,
L.E., , P.A., Vera, P.A., Castillo, L.E., Aravena, C.M., Schulz, D.A., Medina, L.E., 2011.
Ore grade estimation by feature selection and voting using boundary detection in
digital image analysis. Int. J. Miner. Process. 101, 28-36.

Perianayagam, S., Andrews, G.R., Hartman, J.H., 2010. Rex: a toolset for reproducing
software experiments. In: in: 2010 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics
and Biomedicine (BIBM). IEEE, pp. 613-617.

Petruk, W., 1976. Application of quantitative mineralogical analysis of ores to ore
dressing. CIM Bull. 69, 146-153.

Philander, C., Rozendaal, A., 2014. A process mineralogy approach to geometallurgical
model refinement for the Namakwa Sands heavy minerals operations, west coast of
South Africa. Miner. Eng. 65, 9-16.

Prasad, M.S., 1992. Reagents in the mineral industry -recent trends and applications.
Miner. Eng. 5, 279-294,

Roux, W.P., Naudé, N., 2014. Positron emission particle tracking inside a laboratory
batch jig, The Journal of The Southern African Institute of. Mining and Metallurgy
114, 525-528.

Rozendaal, A., Le Roux, S.G., du Plessis, A., Philander, C., 2018. Grade and product
quality control by microCT scanning of the world class Namakwa Sands Ti-Zr placer
deposit West Coast, South Africa: An orientation study. Miner. Eng. 116, 152-162.

Schwab, K., 2015. The Fourth Industrial Revolution: what it means, how to respond,
available on https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/the-fourth-industrial-
revolution-what-it-means-and-how-to-respond/.

Segura-Salazar, J., Lima, F.M., Tavares, L.M., 2019. Life Cycle Assessment in the minerals
industry: Current practice, harmonization efforts, and potential improvement
through the integration with process simulation. J. Clean. Prod. 232, 174-192.

Seppala, P., Sorsa, A., Paavola, M., Remes, A., Ruuska, J., Leiviska, K., 2014. Pilot Plant
Simulation as a Tool for More Efficient Mineral Processing. IFAC Proc. 47,
11506-11511.
Y. Ghorbani et al.

Souza, F.A.A., Aratijo, R., Mendes, J., 2016. Review of soft sensor methods for regression
applications. Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst. 152, 69-79. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
CHEMOLAB.2015.12.011.

Spackova, H., Mensik, M., Slacala, J., Brezina, J., 2019. Modern information systems for
efficient management of metallurgical plants, in: Proceedings 28th International
Conference on Metallurgy and Materials. Brno.

Sutherland, D., 2007. Estimation of mineral grain size using automated mineralogy.
Miner. Eng. 20, 452-460.

Sutherland, D.N., Gottlieb, P., 1991. Application of automated quantitative mineralogy
in mineral processing. Miner. Eng. 4, 753-762.

Suuronen, J.-P., Sayab, M., 2018. 3D nanopetrography and chemical imaging of datable
zircons by synchrotron multimodal X-ray tomography. Sci. Rep. 8, 4747.

Taha, O., Rashid Khan, M., 2011. Advanced process control for clean fuel production:
smart plant of the future. Adv. Clean Hydrocarb. Fuel Process. 496-508.

Takahashi, H., Sugiyama, T., 2019. Application of non-destructive integrated CT-XRD
method to investigate alteration of cementitious materials subjected to high
temperature and pure water. Constr. Build. Mater. 203, 579-588.

Tessier, J., Duchesne, C., Bartolacci, G., 2007. A machine vision approach to on-line
estimation of run-of-mine ore composition on conveyor belts. Miner, Eng https://
doi.org///doi.org/10.1016/j.mineng.2007.04.009.

Ueda, T., Oki, T., Koyanaka, S., 2016. Statistical effect of sampling particle number on
mineral liberation assessment. Miner. Eng. 98, 204-212.

Veijola, H., 2014. Start-up tests of OMS ’ s minipilot beneficiation plant and its
applicability on the research use. University of Oulu.

Viermetz, M., Birnbacher, L., Willner, M., Achterhold, K., Pfeiffer, F., Herzen, J., 2018.
High resolution laboratory grating-based X-ray phase-contrast CT. Sci. Rep. 8,
15884.

11

Minerals Engineering 159 (2020) 106646

Voigt, M.J., Miller, J., Bbosa, L., Govender, R.A., Bradshaw, D., Mainza, A., Becker, M.,
2019. Developing a 3D mineral texture quantification method of drill core for
geometallurgy. J. South. African Inst. Min. Metall. 119, 347-353.

Wang, X., Huang, L., Yang, P., Yang, C., Xie, Q., 2016. Online estimation of the pH value
for froth flotation of bauxite based on adaptive multiple neural networks. IFAC-
Papers OnLine 49, 149-154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2016.10.112.

Waters, K.E., Rowson, N.A., Fan, X., Cilliers, J.J., 2009. Following the path of
hydrophobic and hydrophilic particles in a Denver Cell using positron emission
particle tracking. Asia-Pac. J. Chem. Eng. 4 (2), 218-225.

Waters, K.E., Rowson, N.A., Fan, X., Parker, D.J., Cilliers, J.J., 2008. Positron emission
particle tracking as a method to map the movement of particles in the pulp and froth
phases. Miner. Eng. 21 (12-14), 877-882.

Wei, Q., Leblon, B., la Rocque, A., 2011. On the use of X-ray computed tomography for
determining wood properties: A review 1. Can. J. For. Res. 41, 2120-2140.

Whiteman, E., Lotter, N.O., Amos, S.R., 2016. Process mineralogy as a predictive tool for
flowsheet design to advance the Kamoa project. Miner. Eng. 96-97, 185-193.

Xu, Q., Li, Y., Chu, Y., 2018. Research on Condition Monitoring Platform for Mineral
Processing Equipment Based on Industrial Cloud. In: in: 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Consumer Electronics-Taiwan (ICCE-TW), pp. 1-2.

Xu, W., Dhawan, N., Lin, C.-L., Miller, J.D., 2013. Further study of grain boundary
fracture in the breakage of single multiphase particles using X-ray microtomography
procedures. Miner. Eng. 46-47, 89-94.

Yang, F., Shah, S.L., Xiao, D., 2010. SDG (Signed Directed Graph) based process
description and fault propagation analysis for a tailings pumping process. IFAC Proc.
43, 50-55. https://doi.org/10.3182/20100802-3-ZA-2014.00011.

Yu, G., Chai, T., Luo, X., 2011. Multiobjective production planning optimization using
hybrid evolutionary algorithms for mineral processing. IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput.
15, 487-514.
